=== citation verification summary ===
test queries:       50
in-scope queries:   42
out-of-scope rows:  8
chunks loaded:      1754
index check:        deferred to the evaluation runner

PASS — all expected in-scope citations resolve to local chunks

=== key fact review aid ===
Fact presence is for human review only; it is not scored here.

--- G-01 What are the VFR weather minimums in Class C airspace?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.155
expected key facts:
  - 3 SM visibility
  - 500 ft below clouds
  - 1,000 ft above clouds
  - 2,000 ft horizontal from clouds

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.155
  § 91.155 Basic VFR weather minimums
  (a) Except as provided in paragraph
  (b) of this section and § 91.157, no person may operate an aircraft under VFR when the flight visibility is less, or at a distance from clouds that is less, than that prescribed for the corresponding altitude and class of airspace in the following table:
  (b) Class G Airspace. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section, the following operations may be conducted in Class G airspace below 1,200 feet above the surface: (1) Helicopter. A helicopter may be operated clear of clouds in an airport traffic pattern within ⁄ mile of the runway or helipad of intended landing if the flight visibility is not less than ⁄ statute mile. (2) Airplane, powered parachute, or weight-shift-control aircraft. If the visibility is less than 3 statute miles but not less than 1 statute mile during night hours and you are operating in an airport traffic pattern within ⁄ mile of the runway, you may operate an airplane, powered parachute, or weight-shift-control aircraft clear of clouds.
  (c) Except as provided in § 91.157, no person may operate an aircraft beneath the ceiling under VFR within the lateral boundaries of controlled airspace designated to the surface for an airport when the ceiling is less than 1,000 feet.
  (d) Except as provided in § 91.157 of this part, no person may take off or land an aircraft, or enter the traffic pattern of an airport, under VFR, within the lateral boundaries of the surface areas of Class B, Class C, Class D, or Class E airspace designated for an airport—(1) Unless ground visibility at that airport is at least 3 statute miles; or (2) If ground visibility is not reported at that airport, unless flight visibility during landing or takeoff, or while operating in the traffic pattern is at least 3 statute miles.
  (e) For the purpose of this section, an aircraft operating at the base altitude of a Class E airspace area is considered to be within the airspace directly below that area.

--- G-02 When is a transponder required?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.215
expected key facts:
  - Class A, Class B, and Class C airspace
  - within 30 NM of a Class B primary airport
  - above 10,000 ft MSL except at or below 2,500 ft AGL
  - above Class C airspace

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.215
  § 91.215 ATC transponder and altitude reporting equipment and use
  (a) All airspace: U.S.-registered civil aircraft. For operations not conducted under part 121 or 135 of this chapter, ATC transponder equipment installed must meet the performance and environmental requirements of any class of TSO-C74b (Mode A) or any class of TSO-C74c (Mode A with altitude reporting capability) as appropriate, or the appropriate class of TSO-C112 (Mode S).
  (b) All airspace. Unless otherwise authorized or directed by ATC, and except as provided in paragraph (e)(1) of this section, no person may operate an aircraft in the airspace described in paragraphs (b)(1) through (5) of this section, unless that aircraft is equipped with an operable coded radar beacon transponder having either Mode A 4096 code capability, replying to Mode A interrogations with the code specified by ATC, or a Mode S capability, replying to Mode A interrogations with the code specified by ATC and Mode S interrogations in accordance with the applicable provisions specified in TSO–C112, and that aircraft is equipped with automatic pressure altitude reporting equipment having a Mode C capability that automatically replies to Mode C interrogations by transmitting pressure altitude information in 100-foot increments. The requirements of this paragraph (b) apply to—(1) All aircraft. In Class A, Class B, and Class C airspace areas; (2) All aircraft. In all airspace within 30 nautical miles of an airport listed in appendix D, section 1 of this part from the surface upward to 10,000 feet MSL; (3) Notwithstanding paragraph (b)(2) of this section, any aircraft which was not originally certificated with an engine-driven electrical system or which has not subsequently been certified with such a system installed, balloon or glider may conduct operations in the airspace within 30 nautical miles of an airport listed in appendix D, section 1 of this part provided such operations are conducted—
  (i) Outside any Class A, Class B, or Class C airspace area; and
  (ii) Below the altitude of the ceiling of a Class B or Class C airspace area designated for an airport or 10,000 feet MSL, whichever is lower; and (4) All aircraft in all airspace above the ceiling and within the lateral boundaries of a Class B or Class C airspace area designated for an airport upward to 10,000 feet MSL; and (5) All aircraft except any aircraft which was not originally certificated with an engine-driven electrical system or which has not subsequently been certified with such a system installed, balloon, or glider—
  (i) In all airspace of the 48 contiguous states and the District of Columbia at and above 10,000 feet MSL, excluding the airspace at and below 2,500 feet above the surface; and
  (ii) In the airspace from the surface to 10,000 feet MSL within a 10-nauticalmile radius of any airport listed in appendix D, section 2 of this part, excluding the airspace below 1,200 feet outside of the lateral boundaries of the surface area of the airspace designated for that airport.
  (c) Transponder-on operation. Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) of this section, while in the airspace as specified in paragraph (b) of this section or in all controlled airspace, each person operating an aircraft equipped with an operable ATC transponder maintained in accordance with § 91.413 shall operate the transponder, including Mode C equipment if installed, and shall reply on the appropriate code or as assigned by ATC, unless otherwise directed by ATC when transmitting would jeopardize the safe execution of air traffic control functions.
  (d) ATC authorized deviations. Requests for ATC authorized deviations must be made to the ATC facility having jurisdiction over the concerned airspace within the time periods specified as follows: (1) For operation of an aircraft with an operating transponder but without operating automatic pressure altitude reporting equipment having a Mode C capability, the request may be made at any time. (2) For operation of an aircraft with an inoperative transponder to the airport of ultimate destination, including any intermediate stops, or to proceed to a place where suitable repairs can be made or both, the request may be made at any time. (3) For operation of an aircraft that is not equipped with a transponder, the request must be made at least one hour before the proposed operation.
  (e) Unmanned aircraft. (1) The requirements of paragraph (b) of this section do not apply to a person operating an unmanned aircraft under this part unless the operation is conducted under a flight plan and the person operating the unmanned aircraft maintains twoway communication with ATC. (2) No person may operate an unmanned aircraft under this part with a transponder on unless:
  (i) The operation is conducted under a flight plan and the person operating the unmanned aircraft maintains twoway communication with ATC; or
  (ii) The use of a transponder is otherwise authorized by the Administrator.

--- G-03 How low can I fly over a city?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.119(b)
expected key facts:
  - over a congested area
  - 1,000 ft above the highest obstacle
  - within a 2,000 ft horizontal radius

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.119
  § 91.119 Minimum safe altitudes: General
  Except when necessary for takeoff or landing, no person may operate an aircraft below the following altitudes:
  (a) Anywhere. An altitude allowing, if a power unit fails, an emergency landing without undue hazard to persons or property on the surface.
  (b) Over congested areas. Over any congested area of a city, town, or settlement, or over any open air assembly of persons, an altitude of 1,000 feet above the highest obstacle within a horizontal radius of 2,000 feet of the aircraft.
  (c) Over other than congested areas. An altitude of 500 feet above the surface, except over open water or sparsely populated areas. In those cases, the aircraft may not be operated closer than 500 feet to any person, vessel, vehicle, or structure.
  (d) Helicopters, powered parachutes, and weight-shift-control aircraft. If the operation is conducted without hazard to persons or property on the surface—(1) A helicopter may be operated at less than the minimums prescribed in paragraph (b) or (c) of this section, provided each person operating the helicopter complies with any routes or altitudes specifically prescribed for helicopters by the FAA; and (2) A powered parachute or weightshift-control aircraft may be operated at less than the minimums prescribed in paragraph (c) of this section.

--- G-04 How much fuel do I need for a day VFR flight?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.151(a)
expected key facts:
  - enough fuel to reach the first intended landing point
  - 30 minutes of reserve fuel at normal cruise for day VFR
  - 45 minutes of reserve fuel at normal cruise for night VFR

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.151
  § 91.151 Fuel requirements for flight in VFR conditions
  (a) No person may begin a flight in an airplane under VFR conditions unless (considering wind and forecast weather conditions) there is enough fuel to fly to the first point of intended landing and, assuming normal cruising speed—(1) During the day, to fly after that for at least 30 minutes; or (2) At night, to fly after that for at least 45 minutes.
  (b) No person may begin a flight in a rotorcraft under VFR conditions unless (considering wind and forecast weather conditions) there is enough fuel to fly to the first point of intended landing and, assuming normal cruising speed, to fly after that for at least 20 minutes.

--- G-05 How long after drinking can I fly?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.17(a)
expected key facts:
  - 8 hours bottle-to-throttle
  - no flying with BAC 0.04 or higher
  - no flying while under the influence of alcohol

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.17
  § 91.17 Alcohol or drugs
  (a) No person may act or attempt to act as a crewmember of a civil aircraft—(1) Within 8 hours after the consumption of any alcoholic beverage; (2) While under the influence of alcohol; (3) While using any drug that affects the person’s faculties in any way contrary to safety; or (4) While having an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or greater in a blood or breath specimen. Alcohol concentration means grams of alcohol per deciliter of blood or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath.
  (b) Except in an emergency, no pilot of a civil aircraft may allow a person who appears to be intoxicated or who demonstrates by manner or physical indications that the individual is under the influence of drugs (except a medical patient under proper care) to be carried in that aircraft.
  (c) A crewmember shall do the following: (1) On request of a law enforcement officer, submit to a test to indicate the alcohol concentration in the blood or breath, when—
  (i) The law enforcement officer is authorized under State or local law to conduct the test or to have the test conducted; and
  (ii) The law enforcement officer is requesting submission to the test to investigate a suspected violation of State or local law governing the same or substantially similar conduct prohibited by paragraph (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(4) of this section. (2) Whenever the FAA has a reasonable basis to believe that a person may have violated paragraph (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(4) of this section, on request of the FAA, that person must furnish to the FAA the results, or authorize any clinic, hospital, or doctor, or other person to release to the FAA, the results of each test taken within 4 hours after acting or attempting to act as a crewmember that indicates an alcohol concentration in the blood or breath specimen.
  (d) Whenever the Administrator has a reasonable basis to believe that a person may have violated paragraph (a)(3) of this section, that person shall, upon request by the Administrator, furnish the Administrator, or authorize any clinic, hospital, doctor, or other person to release to the Administrator, the results of each test taken within 4 hours after acting or attempting to act as a crewmember that indicates the presence of any drugs in the body.
  (e) Any test information obtained by the Administrator under paragraph (c) or (d) of this section may be evaluated in determining a person’s qualifications for any airman certificate or possible violations of this chapter and may be used as evidence in any legal proceeding under section 602, 609, or 901 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958.

--- G-06 Two airplanes are approaching head-on — who gives way?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.113(e)
expected key facts:
  - when aircraft approach head-on
  - each pilot must alter course to the right

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.113
  § 91.113 Right-of-way rules: Except water operations
  (a) Inapplicability. This section does not apply to the operation of an aircraft on water.
  (b) General. When weather conditions permit, regardless of whether an operation is conducted under instrument flight rules or visual flight rules, vigilance shall be maintained by each person operating an aircraft so as to see and avoid other aircraft. When a rule of this section gives another aircraft the right-of-way, the pilot shall give way to that aircraft and may not pass over, under, or ahead of it unless well clear.
  (c) In distress. An aircraft in distress has the right-of-way over all other air traffic.
  (d) Converging. When aircraft of the same category are converging at approximately the same altitude (except head-on, or nearly so), the aircraft to the other’s right has the right-of-way. If the aircraft are of different categories—(1) A balloon has the right-of-way over any other category of aircraft; (2) A glider has the right-of-way over an airship, powered parachute, weightshift-control aircraft, airplane, or rotorcraft. (3) An airship has the right-of-way over a powered parachute, weight-shiftcontrol aircraft, airplane, or rotorcraft. However, an aircraft towing or refueling other aircraft has the right-ofway over all other engine-driven aircraft.
  (e) Approaching head-on. When aircraft are approaching each other headon, or nearly so, each pilot of each aircraft shall alter course to the right.
  (f) Overtaking. Each aircraft that is being overtaken has the right-of-way and each pilot of an overtaking aircraft shall alter course to the right to pass well clear.
  (g) Landing. Aircraft, while on final approach to land or while landing, have the right-of-way over other aircraft in flight or operating on the surface, except that they shall not take advantage of this rule to force an aircraft off the runway surface which has already landed and is attempting to make way for an aircraft on final approach. When two or more aircraft are approaching an airport for the purpose of landing, the aircraft at the lower altitude has the right-of-way, but it shall not take advantage of this rule to cut in front of another which is on final approach to land or to overtake that aircraft.

--- G-07 When do my passengers have to wear seatbelts?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.107
expected key facts:
  - during movement on the surface
  - during takeoff
  - during landing

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.107
  § 91.107 Use of safety belts, shoulder harnesses, and child restraint systems
  (a) Unless otherwise authorized by the Administrator—(1) No pilot may take off a U.S.-registered civil aircraft (except a free balloon that incorporates a basket or gondola, or an airship type certificated before November 2, 1987) unless the pilot in command of that aircraft ensures that each person on board is briefed on how to fasten and unfasten that person’s safety belt and, if installed, shoulder harness. (2) No pilot may cause to be moved on the surface, take off, or land a U.S.registered civil aircraft (except a free balloon that incorporates a basket or gondola, or an airship type certificated before November 2, 1987) unless the pilot in command of that aircraft ensures that each person on board has been notified to fasten his or her safety belt and, if installed, his or her shoulder harness. (3) Except as provided in this paragraph, each person on board a U.S.-registered civil aircraft (except a free balloon that incorporates a basket or gondola or an airship type certificated before November 2, 1987) must occupy an approved seat or berth with a safety belt and, if installed, shoulder harness, properly secured about him or her during movement on the surface, takeoff, and landing. For seaplane and float equipped rotorcraft operations during movement on the surface, the person pushing off the seaplane or rotorcraft from the dock and the person mooring the seaplane or rotorcraft at the dock are excepted from the preceding seating and safety belt requirements. Notwithstanding the preceding requirements of this paragraph, a person may:
  (i) Be held by an adult who is occupying an approved seat or berth, provided that the person being held has not reached his or her second birthday and does not occupy or use any restraining device;
  (ii) Use the floor of the aircraft as a seat, provided that the person is on board for the purpose of engaging in sport parachuting; or (iii) Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, occupy an approved child restraint system furnished by the operator or one of the persons described in paragraph (a)(3)(iii)(A) of this section provided that: (A) The child is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or attendant designated by the child’s parent or guardian to attend to the safety of the child during the flight; (B) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(3)(iii)(B)( 4 ) of this action, the approved child restraint system bears one or more labels as follows: ( 1 ) Seats manufactured to U.S. standards between January 1, 1981, and February 25, 1985, must bear the label: ‘‘This child restraint system conforms to all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards’’; ( 2 ) Seats manufactured to U.S. standards on or after February 26, 1985, must bear two labels: ( i ) ‘‘This child restraint system conforms to all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards’’; and ( ii ) ‘‘THIS RESTRAINT IS CER-TIFIED FOR USE IN MOTOR VEHI-CLES AND AIRCRAFT’’ in red lettering; ( 3 ) Seats that do not qualify under paragraphs (a)(3)(iii)(B)( 1 ) and (a)(3)(iii)(B)( 2 ) of this section must bear a label or markings showing: ( ii ) That the seat was manufactured under the standards of the United Nations; ( iii ) That the seat or child restraint device furnished by the operator was approved by the FAA through Type Certificate or Supplemental Type Certificate; or ( iv ) That the seat or child restraint device furnished by the operator, or one of the persons described in paragraph (a)(3)(iii)(A) of this section, was approved by the FAA in accordance with § 21.8(d) of this chapter or Technical Standard Order C–100b or a later version. The child restraint device manufactured by AmSafe, Inc. (CARES, Part No. 4082) and approved by the FAA in accordance with § 21.305(d) (2010 ed.) of this chapter may continue to bear a label or markings showing FAA approval in accordance with § 21.305(d) (2010 ed.) of this chapter. ( 4 ) Except as provided in § 91.107(a)(3)(iii)(B)( 3 )( iii ) and § 91.107(a)(3)(iii)(B)( 3 )( iv ), booster-type child restraint systems (as defined in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 213 (49 CFR 571.213)), vest- and harness-type child restraint systems, and lap held child restraints are not approved for use in aircraft; and (C) The operator complies with the following requirements: ( 1 ) The restraint system must be properly secured to an approved forward-facing seat or berth; ( 2 ) The child must be properly secured in the restraint system and must not exceed the specified weight limit for the restraint system; and ( 3 ) The restraint system must bear the appropriate label(s).
  (b) Unless otherwise stated, this section does not apply to operations conducted under part 121, 125, or 135 of this chapter. Paragraph (a)(3) of this section does not apply to persons subject to § 91.105.

--- G-08 How high can I fly without supplemental oxygen?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.211(a)
expected key facts:
  - crew oxygen required after 30 minutes above 12,500 ft MSL cabin pressure altitude up to 14,000 ft
  - crew oxygen required at all times above 14,000 ft MSL cabin pressure altitude
  - passengers must be provided oxygen above 15,000 ft MSL cabin pressure altitude

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.211
  § 91.211 Supplemental oxygen
  (a) General. No person may operate a civil aircraft of U.S. registry—(1) At cabin pressure altitudes above 12,500 feet (MSL) up to and including 14,000 feet (MSL) unless the required minimum flight crew is provided with and uses supplemental oxygen for that part of the flight at those altitudes that is of more than 30 minutes duration; (2) At cabin pressure altitudes above 14,000 feet (MSL) unless the required minimum flight crew is provided with and uses supplemental oxygen during the entire flight time at those altitudes; and (3) At cabin pressure altitudes above 15,000 feet (MSL) unless each occupant of the aircraft is provided with supplemental oxygen.
  (b) Pressurized cabin aircraft. (1) No person may operate a civil aircraft of U.S. registry with a pressurized cabin—
  (i) At flight altitudes above flight level 250 unless at least a 10-minute supply of supplemental oxygen, in addition to any oxygen required to satisfy paragraph (a) of this section, is available for each occupant of the aircraft for use in the event that a descent is necessitated by loss of cabin pressurization; and
  (ii) At flight altitudes above flight level 350 unless one pilot at the controls of the airplane is wearing and using an oxygen mask that is secured and sealed and that either supplies oxygen at all times or automatically supplies oxygen whenever the cabin pressure altitude of the airplane exceeds 14,000 feet (MSL), except that the one pilot need not wear and use an oxygen mask while at or below flight level 410 if there are two pilots at the controls and each pilot has a quick-donning type of oxygen mask that can be placed on the face with one hand from the ready position within 5 seconds, supplying oxygen and properly secured and sealed. (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section, if for any reason at any time it is necessary for one pilot to leave the controls of the aircraft when operating at flight altitudes above flight level 350, the remaining pilot at the controls shall put on and use an oxygen mask until the other pilot has returned to that crewmember’s station.

--- G-09 What's the speed limit below 10,000 feet?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.117(a)
expected key facts:
  - 250 KIAS
  - below 10,000 ft MSL

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.117
  § 91.117 Aircraft speed
  (a) Unless otherwise authorized by the Administrator, no person may operate an aircraft below 10,000 feet MSL at an indicated airspeed of more than 250 knots (288 m.p.h.).
  (b) Unless otherwise authorized or required by ATC, no person may operate an aircraft at or below 2,500 feet above the surface within 4 nautical miles of the primary airport of a Class C or Class D airspace area at an indicated airspeed of more than 200 knots (230 mph.). This paragraph (b) does not apply to any operations within a Class B airspace area. Such operations shall comply with paragraph (a) of this section.
  (c) No person may operate an aircraft in the airspace underlying a Class B airspace area designated for an airport or in a VFR corridor designated through such a Class B airspace area, at an indicated airspeed of more than 200 knots (230 mph).
  (d) If the minimum safe airspeed for any particular operation is greater than the maximum speed prescribed in this section, the aircraft may be operated at that minimum speed.

--- G-10 What inspections does my airplane need to be legal for VFR flight?
expected citation: 14 CFR §§ 91.409, 91.413
expected key facts:
  - annual inspection within 12 calendar months
  - transponder test every 24 calendar months
  - 100-hour inspection if operated for hire

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.409
  § 91.409 Inspections
  (a) Except as provided in paragraph
  (c) of this section, no person may operate an aircraft unless, within the preceding 12 calendar months, it has had—(1) An annual inspection in accordance with part 43 of this chapter and has been approved for return to service by a person authorized by § 43.7 of this chapter; or (2) An inspection for the issuance of an airworthiness certificate in accordance with part 21 of this chapter. No inspection performed under paragraph (b) of this section may be substituted for any inspection required by this paragraph unless it is performed by a person authorized to perform annual inspections and is entered as an ‘‘annual’’ inspection in the required maintenance records.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.409
  § 91.409 Inspections
  (b) Except as provided in paragraph

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.409
  § 91.409 Inspections
  (c) of this section, no person may operate an aircraft carrying any person (other than a crewmember) for hire, and no person may give flight instruction for hire in an aircraft which that person provides, unless within the preceding 100 hours of time in service the aircraft has received an annual or 100hour inspection and been approved for return to service in accordance with part 43 of this chapter or has received an inspection for the issuance of an airworthiness certificate in accordance with part 21 of this chapter. The 100hour limitation may be exceeded by not more than 10 hours while en route to reach a place where the inspection can be done. The excess time used to reach a place where the inspection can be done must be included in computing the next 100 hours of time in service.
  (c) Paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to—(1) An aircraft that carries a special flight permit, a current experimental certificate, or a light-sport or provisional airworthiness certificate; (2) An aircraft inspected in accordance with an approved aircraft inspection program under part 125 or 135 of this chapter and so identified by the registration number in the operations specifications of the certificate holder having the approved inspection program; (3) An aircraft subject to the requirements of paragraph (d) or (e) of this section; or (4) Turbine-powered rotorcraft when the operator elects to inspect that rotorcraft in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.409
  § 91.409 Inspections
  (d) Progressive inspection. Each registered owner or operator of an aircraft desiring to use a progressive inspection program must submit a written request to the responsible Flight Standards office, and shall provide—(1) A certificated mechanic holding an inspection authorization, a certificated airframe repair station, or the manufacturer of the aircraft to supervise or conduct the progressive inspection; (2) A current inspection procedures manual available and readily understandable to pilot and maintenance personnel containing, in detail—
  (i) An explanation of the progressive inspection, including the continuity of inspection responsibility, the making of reports, and the keeping of records and technical reference material;
  (ii) An inspection schedule, specifying the intervals in hours or days when routine and detailed inspections will be performed and including instructions for exceeding an inspection interval by not more than 10 hours while en route and for changing an inspection interval because of service experience; (iii) Sample routine and detailed inspection forms and instructions for their use; and
  (iv) Sample reports and records and instructions for their use; (3) Enough housing and equipment for necessary disassembly and proper inspection of the aircraft; and (4) Appropriate current technical information for the aircraft. The frequency and detail of the progressive inspection shall provide for the complete inspection of the aircraft within each 12 calendar months and be consistent with the manufacturer’s recommendations, field service experience, and the kind of operation in which the aircraft is engaged. The progressive inspection schedule must ensure that the aircraft, at all times, will be airworthy and will conform to all applicable FAA aircraft specifications, type certificate data sheets, airworthiness directives, and other approved data. If the progressive inspection is discontinued, the owner or operator shall immediately notify the responsible Flight Standards office, in writing, of the discontinuance. After the discontinuance, the first annual inspection under § 91.409(a)(1) is due within 12 calendar months after the last complete inspection of the aircraft under the progressive inspection. The 100hour inspection under § 91.409(b) is due within 100 hours after that complete inspection. A complete inspection of the aircraft, for the purpose of determining when the annual and 100-hour inspections are due, requires a detailed inspection of the aircraft and all its components in accordance with the progressive inspection. A routine inspection of the aircraft and a detailed inspection of several components is not considered to be a complete inspection.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.409
  § 91.409 Inspections
  (e) Large airplanes (to which part 125 is not applicable), turbojet multiengine airplanes, turbopropeller-powered multiengine airplanes, and turbine-powered rotorcraft. No person may operate a large airplane, turbojet multiengine airplane, turbopropeller-powered multiengine airplane, or turbine-powered rotorcraft unless the replacement times for life-limited parts specified in the aircraft specifications, type data sheets, or other documents approved by the Administrator are complied with and the airplane or turbine-powered rotorcraft, including the airframe, engines, propellers, rotors, appliances, survival equipment, and emergency equipment, is inspected in accordance with an inspection program selected under the provisions of paragraph (f) of this section, except that, the owner or operator of a turbine-powered rotorcraft may elect to use the inspection provisions of § 91.409(a), (b), (c), or (d) in lieu of an inspection option of § 91.409(f).

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.409
  § 91.409 Inspections
  (f) Selection of inspection program under paragraph (e) of this section. The registered owner or operator of each airplane or turbine-powered rotorcraft described in paragraph (e) of this section must select, identify in the aircraft maintenance records, and use one of the following programs for the inspection of the aircraft: (1) A continuous airworthiness inspection program that is part of a continuous airworthiness maintenance program currently in use by a person holding an air carrier operating certificate or an operating certificate issued under part 121 or 135 of this chapter and operating that make and model aircraft under part 121 of this chapter or operating that make and model under part 135 of this chapter and maintaining it under § 135.411(a)(2) of this chapter. (2) An approved aircraft inspection program approved under § 135.419 of this chapter and currently in use by a person holding an operating certificate issued under part 135 of this chapter. (3) A current inspection program recommended by the manufacturer. (4) Any other inspection program established by the registered owner or operator of that airplane or turbinepowered rotorcraft and approved by the Administrator under paragraph (g) of this section. However, the Administrator may require revision of this inspection program in accordance with the provisions of § 91.415. Each operator shall include in the selected program the name and address of the person responsible for scheduling the inspections required by the program and make a copy of that program available to the person performing inspections on the aircraft and, upon request, to the Administrator.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.409
  § 91.409 Inspections
  (g) Inspection program approved under paragraph (e) of this section. Each operator of an airplane or turbine-powered rotorcraft desiring to establish or change an approved inspection program under paragraph (f)(4) of this section must submit the program for approval to the responsible Flight Standards office. The program must be in writing and include at least the following information: (1) Instructions and procedures for the conduct of inspections for the particular make and model airplane or turbine-powered rotorcraft, including necessary tests and checks. The instructions and procedures must set forth in detail the parts and areas of the airframe, engines, propellers, rotors, and appliances, including survival and emergency equipment required to be inspected. (2) A schedule for performing the inspections that must be performed under the program expressed in terms of the time in service, calendar time, number of system operations, or any combination of these.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.409
  § 91.409 Inspections
  (h) Changes from one inspection program to another. When an operator changes from one inspection program under paragraph (f) of this section to another, the time in service, calendar times, or cycles of operation accumulated under the previous program must be applied in determining inspection due times under the new program.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.413
  § 91.413 ATC transponder tests and inspections
  (a) No persons may use an ATC transponder that is specified in 91.215(a), 121.345(c), or § 135.143(c) of this chapter unless, within the preceding 24 calendar months, the ATC transponder has been tested and inspected and found to comply with appendix F of part 43 of this chapter; and
  (b) Following any installation or maintenance on an ATC transponder where data correspondence error could be introduced, the integrated system has been tested, inspected, and found to comply with paragraph (c), appendix E, of part 43 of this chapter.
  (c) The tests and inspections specified in this section must be conducted by—(1) A certificated repair station properly equipped to perform those functions and holding—
  (i) A radio rating, Class III;
  (ii) A limited radio rating appropriate to the make and model transponder to be tested; (iii) A limited rating appropriate to the test to be performed; (2) A holder of a continuous airworthiness maintenance program as provided in part 121 or § 135.411(a)(2) of this chapter; or (3) The manufacturer of the aircraft on which the transponder to be tested is installed, if the transponder was installed by that manufacturer.

--- G-11 What are the Special VFR weather minimums?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.157
expected key facts:
  - ATC clearance required
  - 1 SM visibility
  - clear of clouds
  - night SVFR requires an instrument rating
  - night SVFR requires an IFR-equipped aircraft

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.157
  § 91.157 Special VFR weather minimums
  (a) Except as provided in appendix D, section 3, of this part, special VFR operations may be conducted under the weather minimums and requirements of this section, instead of those contained in § 91.155, below 10,000 feet MSL within the airspace contained by the upward extension of the lateral boundaries of the controlled airspace designated to the surface for an airport.
  (b) Special VFR operations may only be conducted—(1) With an ATC clearance; (2) Clear of clouds; (3) Except for helicopters, when flight visibility is at least 1 statute mile; and (4) Except for helicopters, between sunrise and sunset (or in Alaska, when the sun is 6 degrees or less below the horizon) unless—
  (i) The person being granted the ATC clearance meets the applicable requirements for instrument flight under part 61 of this chapter; and
  (ii) The aircraft is equipped as required in § 91.205(d).
  (c) No person may take off or land an aircraft (other than a helicopter) under special VFR—(1) Unless ground visibility is at least 1 statute mile; or (2) If ground visibility is not reported, unless flight visibility is at least 1 statute mile. For the purposes of this paragraph, the term flight visibility includes the visibility from the cockpit of an aircraft in takeoff position if:
  (i) The flight is conducted under this part 91; and
  (ii) The airport at which the aircraft is located is a satellite airport that does not have weather reporting capabilities.
  (d) The determination of visibility by a pilot in accordance with paragraph (c)(2) of this section is not an official weather report or an official ground visibility report.

--- G-12 I'm flying VFR eastbound at cruise — what altitude should I pick?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.159
expected key facts:
  - magnetic course 0 to 179 degrees
  - odd thousand foot altitude plus 500 ft
  - applies above 3,000 ft AGL

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.159
  § 91.159 VFR cruising altitude or flight level
  Except while holding in a holding pattern of 2 minutes or less, or while turning, each person operating an aircraft under VFR in level cruising flight more than 3,000 feet above the surface shall maintain the appropriate altitude or flight level prescribed below, unless otherwise authorized by ATC:
  (a) When operating below 18,000 feet MSL and—(1) On a magnetic course of zero degrees through 179 degrees, any odd thousand foot MSL altitude + 500 feet (such as 3,500, 5,500, or 7,500); or (2) On a magnetic course of 180 degrees through 359 degrees, any even thousand foot MSL altitude + 500 feet (such as 4,500, 6,500, or 8,500).
  (b) When operating above 18,000 feet MSL, maintain the altitude or flight level assigned by ATC.

--- G-13 What instruments are required for day VFR?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.205(b)
expected key facts:
  - airspeed indicator
  - altimeter
  - magnetic direction indicator
  - tachometer for each engine
  - oil pressure gauge
  - fuel gauge

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.205
  § 91.205 Powered civil aircraft with standard category U.S. airworthiness certificates: Instrument and equipment requirements
  (a) General. Except as provided in paragraphs (c)(3) and (e) of this section, no person may operate a powered civil aircraft with a standard category U.S. airworthiness certificate in any operation described in paragraphs (b) through (f) of this section unless that aircraft contains the instruments and equipment specified in those paragraphs (or FAA-approved equivalents) for that type of operation, and those instruments and items of equipment are in operable condition.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.205
  § 91.205 Powered civil aircraft with standard category U.S. airworthiness certificates: Instrument and equipment requirements
  (b) Visual-flight rules (day). For VFR flight during the day, the following instruments and equipment are required: (1) Airspeed indicator. (2) Altimeter. (3) Magnetic direction indicator. (4) Tachometer for each engine. (5) Oil pressure gauge for each engine using pressure system. (6) Temperature gauge for each liquid-cooled engine. (7) Oil temperature gauge for each air-cooled engine. (8) Manifold pressure gauge for each altitude engine. (9) Fuel gauge indicating the quantity of fuel in each tank. (10) Landing gear position indicator, if the aircraft has a retractable landing gear. (11) For small civil airplanes certificated after March 11, 1996, in accordance with part 23 of this chapter, an approved aviation red or aviation white anticollision light system. In the event of failure of any light of the anticollision light system, operation of the aircraft may continue to a location where repairs or replacement can be made. (12) If the aircraft is operated for hire over water and beyond power-off gliding distance from shore, approved flotation gear readily available to each occupant and, unless the aircraft is operating under part 121 of this subchapter, at least one pyrotechnic signaling device. As used in this section, ‘‘shore’’ means that area of the land adjacent to the water which is above the high water mark and excludes land areas which are intermittently under water. (13) An approved safety belt with an approved metal-to-metal latching device, or other approved restraint system for each occupant 2 years of age or older. (14) For small civil airplanes manufactured after July 18, 1978, an approved shoulder harness or restraint system for each front seat. For small civil airplanes manufactured after December 12, 1986, an approved shoulder harness or restraint system for all seats. Shoulder harnesses installed at flightcrew stations must permit the flightcrew member, when seated and with the safety belt and shoulder harness fastened, to perform all functions necessary for flight operations. For purposes of this paragraph—
  (i) The date of manufacture of an airplane is the date the inspection acceptance records reflect that the airplane is complete and meets the FAA-approved type design data; and
  (ii) A front seat is a seat located at a flightcrew member station or any seat located alongside such a seat. (15) An emergency locator transmitter, if required by § 91.207. (16) [Reserved] (17) For rotorcraft manufactured after September 16, 1992, a shoulder harness for each seat that meets the requirements of § 27.2 or § 29.2 of this chapter in effect on September 16, 1991.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.205
  § 91.205 Powered civil aircraft with standard category U.S. airworthiness certificates: Instrument and equipment requirements
  (c) Visual flight rules (night). For VFR flight at night, the following instruments and equipment are required: (1) Instruments and equipment specified in paragraph (b) of this section. (2) Approved position lights. (3) An approved aviation red or aviation white anticollision light system on all U.S.-registered civil aircraft. Anticollision light systems initially installed after August 11, 1971, on aircraft for which a type certificate was issued or applied for before August 11, 1971, must at least meet the anticollision light standards of part 23, 25, 27, or 29 of this chapter, as applicable, that were in effect on August 10, 1971, except that the color may be either aviation red or aviation white. In the event of failure of any light of the anticollision light system, operations with the aircraft may be continued to a stop where repairs or replacement can be made. (4) If the aircraft is operated for hire, one electric landing light. (5) An adequate source of electrical energy for all installed electrical and radio equipment. (6) One spare set of fuses, or three spare fuses of each kind required, that are accessible to the pilot in flight.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.205
  § 91.205 Powered civil aircraft with standard category U.S. airworthiness certificates: Instrument and equipment requirements
  (d) Instrument flight rules. For IFR flight, the following instruments and equipment are required: (1) Instruments and equipment specified in paragraph (b) of this section, and, for night flight, instruments and equipment specified in paragraph (c) of this section. (2) Two-way radio communication and navigation equipment suitable for the route to be flown. (3) Gyroscopic rate-of-turn indicator, except on the following aircraft:
  (i) Airplanes with a third attitude instrument system usable through flight attitudes of 360 degrees of pitch and roll and installed in accordance with the instrument requirements prescribed in § 121.305(j) of this chapter; and
  (ii) Rotorcraft with a third attitude instrument system usable through flight attitudes of 80 degrees of pitch and 120 degrees of roll and installed in accordance with § 29.1303(g) of this chapter. (4) Slip-skid indicator. (5) Sensitive altimeter adjustable for barometric pressure. (6) A clock displaying hours, minutes, and seconds with a sweep-second pointer or digital presentation. (7) Generator or alternator of adequate capacity. (8) Gyroscopic pitch and bank indicator (artificial horizon). (9) Gyroscopic direction indicator (directional gyro or equivalent).

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.205
  § 91.205 Powered civil aircraft with standard category U.S. airworthiness certificates: Instrument and equipment requirements
  (e) Flight at and above 24,000 feet MSL (FL 240). If VOR navigation equipment is required under paragraph (d)(2) of this section, no person may operate a U.S.-registered civil aircraft within the 50 states and the District of Columbia at or above FL 240 unless that aircraft is equipped with approved DME or a suitable RNAV system. When the DME or RNAV system required by this paragraph fails at and above FL 240, the pilot in command of the aircraft must notify ATC immediately, and then may continue operations at and above FL 240 to the next airport of intended landing where repairs or replacement of the equipment can be made.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.205
  § 91.205 Powered civil aircraft with standard category U.S. airworthiness certificates: Instrument and equipment requirements
  (f) Category II operations. The requirements for Category II operations are the instruments and equipment specified in—(1) Paragraph (d) of this section; and (2) Appendix A to this part.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.205
  § 91.205 Powered civil aircraft with standard category U.S. airworthiness certificates: Instrument and equipment requirements
  (g) Category III operations. The instruments and equipment required for Category III operations are specified in paragraph (d) of this section.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.205
  § 91.205 Powered civil aircraft with standard category U.S. airworthiness certificates: Instrument and equipment requirements
  (h) Night vision goggle operations. For night vision goggle operations, the following instruments and equipment must be installed in the aircraft, functioning in a normal manner, and approved for use by the FAA: (1) Instruments and equipment specified in paragraph (b) of this section, instruments and equipment specified in paragraph (c) of this section; (2) Night vision goggles; (3) Interior and exterior aircraft lighting system required for night vision goggle operations; (4) Two-way radio communications system; (5) Gyroscopic pitch and bank indicator (artificial horizon); (6) Generator or alternator of adequate capacity for the required instruments and equipment; and (7) Radar altimeter.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.205
  § 91.205 Powered civil aircraft with standard category U.S. airworthiness certificates: Instrument and equipment requirements
  (i) Exclusions. Paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section do not apply to operations conducted by a holder of a certificate issued under part 121 or part 135 of this chapter.

--- G-14 What documents must be on board the aircraft?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.203
expected key facts:
  - airworthiness certificate
  - registration certificate
  - operating limitations

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.203
  § 91.203 Civil aircraft: Certifications required
  (a) Except as provided in § 91.715, no person may operate a civil aircraft unless it has within it the following: (1) An appropriate and current airworthiness certificate. Each U.S. airworthiness certificate used to comply with this subparagraph (except a special flight permit, a copy of the applicable operations specifications issued under § 21.197(c) of this chapter, appropriate sections of the air carrier manual required by parts 121 and 135 of this chapter containing that portion of the operations specifications issued under § 21.197(c), or an authorization under § 91.611) must have on it the registration number assigned to the aircraft under part 47 or 48 of this chapter. However, the airworthiness certificate need not have on it an assigned special identification number before 10 days after that number is first affixed to the aircraft. A revised airworthiness certificate having on it an assigned special identification number, that has been affixed to an aircraft, may only be obtained upon application to the responsible Flight Standards office. (2) An effective U.S. registration certificate issued to its owner or, for operation within the United States, the second copy of the Aircraft registration Application as provided for in § 47.31(c), a Certificate of Aircraft registration as provided in part 48, or a registration certification issued under the laws of a foreign country.
  (b) No person may operate a civil aircraft unless the airworthiness certificate required by paragraph (a) of this section or a special flight authorization issued under § 91.715 is displayed at the cabin or cockpit entrance so that it is legible to passengers or crew.
  (c) No person may operate an aircraft with a fuel tank installed within the passenger compartment or a baggage compartment unless the installation was accomplished pursuant to part 43 of this chapter, and a copy of FAA Form 337 authorizing that installation is on board the aircraft.
  (d) No person may operate a civil airplane (domestic or foreign) into or out of an airport in the United States unless it complies with the fuel venting and exhaust emissions requirements of part 34 of this chapter.

--- G-15 What do I need to enter Class B airspace?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.131
expected key facts:
  - ATC clearance specifically into Class B airspace
  - two-way radio communication
  - Mode C transponder

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.131
  § 91.131 Operations in Class B airspace
  (a) Operating rules. No person may operate an aircraft within a Class B airspace area except in compliance with § 91.129 and the following rules: (1) The operator must receive an ATC clearance from the ATC facility having jurisdiction for that area before operating an aircraft in that area. (2) Unless otherwise authorized by ATC, each person operating a large turbine engine-powered airplane to or from a primary airport for which a Class B airspace area is designated must operate at or above the designated floors of the Class B airspace area while within the lateral limits of that area. (3) Any person conducting pilot training operations at an airport within a Class B airspace area must comply with any procedures established by ATC for such operations in that area.
  (b) Pilot requirements. (1) No person may take off or land a civil aircraft at an airport within a Class B airspace area or operate a civil aircraft within a Class B airspace area unless—
  (i) The pilot in command holds at least a private pilot certificate;
  (ii) The pilot in command holds a recreational pilot certificate and has met—(A) The requirements of § 61.101(d) of this chapter; or (B) The requirements for a student pilot seeking a recreational pilot certificate in § 61.94 of this chapter; (iii) The pilot in command holds a sport pilot certificate and has met—(A) The requirements of § 61.325 of this chapter; or (B) The requirements for a student pilot seeking a recreational pilot certificate in § 61.94 of this chapter; or
  (iv) The aircraft is operated by a student pilot who has met the requirements of § 61.94 or § 61.95 of this chapter, as applicable. (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (b)(1)(ii), (b)(1)(iii) and (b)(1)(iv) of this section, no person may take off or land a civil aircraft at those airports listed in section 4 of appendix D to this part unless the pilot in command holds at least a private pilot certificate.
  (c) Communications and navigation equipment requirements. Unless otherwise authorized by ATC, no person may operate an aircraft within a Class B airspace area unless that aircraft is equipped with—(1) For IFR operation. An operable VOR or TACAN receiver or an operable and suitable RNAV system; and (2) For all operations. An operable two-way radio capable of communications with ATC on appropriate frequencies for that Class B airspace area.
  (d) Other equipment requirements. No person may operate an aircraft in a Class B airspace area unless the aircraft is equipped with—(1) The applicable operating transponder and automatic altitude reporting equipment specified in § 91.215 (a), except as provided in § 91.215 (e), and (2) After January 1, 2020, the applicable Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast Out equipment specified in § 91.225.

--- G-16 Where am I not allowed to do aerobatics?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 91.303
expected key facts:
  - over a congested area
  - over an open-air assembly of persons
  - below 1,500 ft AGL
  - less than 3 SM visibility
  - within Class B, C, D, or E surface areas
  - on an airway

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 91 91.303
  § 91.303 Aerobatic flight
  No person may operate an aircraft in aerobatic flight—
  (a) Over any congested area of a city, town, or settlement;
  (b) Over an open air assembly of persons;
  (c) Within the lateral boundaries of the surface areas of Class B, Class C, Class D, or Class E airspace designated for an airport;
  (d) Within 4 nautical miles of the center line of any Federal airway;
  (e) Below an altitude of 1,500 feet above the surface; or
  (f) When flight visibility is less than 3 statute miles. For the purposes of this section, aerobatic flight means an intentional maneuver involving an abrupt change in an aircraft’s attitude, an abnormal attitude, or abnormal acceleration, not necessary for normal flight.

--- G-17 What documents do I need to carry to act as PIC?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.3
expected key facts:
  - pilot certificate
  - government-issued photo ID
  - appropriate medical certificate

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (a) Required pilot certificate for operating a civil aircraft of the United States. No person may serve as a required pilot flight crewmember of a civil aircraft of the United States, unless that person: (1) Has in the person’s physical possession or readily accessible in the aircraft when exercising the privileges of that pilot certificate or authorization—
  (i) A pilot certificate issued under this part and in accordance with § 61.19;
  (ii) A special purpose pilot authorization issued under § 61.77; (iii) A temporary certificate issued under § 61.17;
  (iv) A document conveying temporary authority to exercise certificate privileges issued by the Airmen Certification Branch under § 61.29(e);
  (v) When engaged in a flight operation within the United States for a part 119 certificate holder authorized to conduct operations under part 121 or 135 of this chapter, a temporary document provided by that certificate holder under an approved certificate verification plan;
  (vi) When engaged in a flight operation within the United States for a fractional ownership program manager authorized to conduct operations under part 91, subpart K, of this chapter, a temporary document provided by that program manager under an approved certificate verification plan; or (vii) When operating an aircraft within a foreign country, a pilot license issued by that country may be used. (2) Has a photo identification that is in that person’s physical possession or readily accessible in the aircraft when exercising the privileges of that pilot certificate or authorization. The photo identification must be a:
  (i) Driver’s license issued by a State, the District of Columbia, or territory or possession of the United States;
  (ii) Government identification card issued by the Federal government, a State, the District of Columbia, or a territory or possession of the United States; (iii) U.S. Armed Forces’ identification card;
  (iv) Official passport; (v) Credential that authorizes unescorted access to a security identification display area at an airport regulated under 49 CFR part 1542; or
  (vi) Other form of identification that the Administrator finds acceptable.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (b) Required pilot certificate for operating a foreign-registered aircraft within the United States. No person may serve as a required pilot flight crewmember of a civil aircraft of foreign registry within the United States, unless—(1) That person’s pilot certificate or document issued under § 61.29(e) is in that person’s physical possession or readily accessible in the aircraft when exercising the privileges of that pilot certificate; and (2) Has been issued in accordance with this part, or has been issued or validated by the country in which the aircraft is registered.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (c) Medical certificate. (1) A person may serve as a required pilot flight crewmember of an aircraft only if that person holds the appropriate medical certificate issued under part 67 of this chapter, or other documentation acceptable to the FAA, that is in that person’s physical possession or readily accessible in the aircraft. Paragraph (c)(2) of this section provides certain exceptions to the requirement to hold a medical certificate. (2) A person is not required to meet the requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this section if that person—
  (i) Is exercising the privileges of a student pilot certificate while seeking a pilot certificate with a glider category rating, a balloon class rating, or glider or balloon privileges;
  (ii) Is exercising the privileges of a student pilot certificate while seeking a sport pilot certificate with other than glider or balloon privileges and holds a U.S. driver’s license; (iii) Is exercising the privileges of a student pilot certificate while seeking a pilot certificate with a weight-shiftcontrol aircraft category rating or a powered parachute category rating and holds a U.S. driver’s license;
  (iv) Is exercising the privileges of a sport pilot certificate with glider or balloon privileges;
  (v) Is exercising the privileges of a sport pilot certificate with other than glider or balloon privileges and holds a U.S. driver’s license. A person who has applied for or held a medical certificate may exercise the privileges of a sport pilot certificate using a U.S. driver’s license only if that person—(A) Has been found eligible for the issuance of at least a third-class airman medical certificate at the time of his or her most recent application; and (B) Has not had his or her most recently issued medical certificate suspended or revoked or most recent Authorization for a Special Issuance of a Medical Certificate withdrawn.
  (vi) Is holding a pilot certificate with a balloon class rating and that person—(A) Is exercising the privileges of a private pilot certificate in a balloon; or (B) Is providing flight training in a balloon in accordance with § 61.133(a)(2)(ii); (vii) Is holding a pilot certificate or a flight instructor certificate with a glider category rating, and is piloting or providing training in a glider, as appropriate; (viii) Is exercising the privileges of a flight instructor certificate, provided the person is not acting as pilot in command or as a required pilot flight crewmember;
  (ix) Is exercising the privileges of a ground instructor certificate;
  (x) Is operating an aircraft within a foreign country using a pilot license issued by that country and possesses evidence of current medical qualification for that license;
  (xi) Is operating an aircraft with a U.S. pilot certificate, issued on the basis of a foreign pilot license, issued under § 61.75, and holds a medical certificate issued by the foreign country that issued the foreign pilot license, which is in that person’s physical possession or readily accessible in the aircraft when exercising the privileges of that airman certificate; (xii) Is a pilot of the U.S. Armed Forces, has an up-to-date U.S. military medical examination, and holds military pilot flight status; (xiii) Is exercising the privileges of a student, recreational or private pilot certificate for operations conducted under the conditions and limitations set forth in § 61.113(i) and holds a U.S. driver’s license; (xiv) Is exercising the privileges of a flight instructor certificate and acting as pilot in command or a required flightcrew member for operations conducted under the conditions and limitations set forth in § 61.113(i) and holds a U.S. driver’s license; or
  (xv) Is exercising the privileges of a student pilot certificate or higher while acting as pilot in command on a special medical flight test authorized under part 67 of this chapter.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (d) Flight instructor certificate. (1) A person who holds a flight instructor certificate issued under this part must have that certificate, or other documentation acceptable to the Administrator, in that person’s physical possession or readily accessible in the aircraft when exercising the privileges of that flight instructor certificate. (2) Except as provided in paragraph (d)(3) of this section, no person other than the holder of a flight instructor certificate issued under this part with the appropriate rating on that certificate may—
  (i) Give training required to qualify a person for solo flight and solo crosscountry flight;
  (ii) Endorse an applicant for a—(A) Pilot certificate or rating issued under this part; (B) Flight instructor certificate or rating issued under this part; or (C) Ground instructor certificate or rating issued under this part; (iii) Endorse a pilot logbook to show training given; or
  (iv) Endorse a logbook for solo operating privileges. (3) A flight instructor certificate issued under this part is not necessary—
  (i) Under paragraph (d)(2) of this section, if the training is given by the holder of a commercial pilot certificate with a lighter-than-air rating, provided the training is given in accordance with the privileges of the certificate in a lighter-than-air aircraft;
  (ii) Under paragraph (d)(2) of this section, if the training is given by the holder of an airline transport pilot certificate with a rating appropriate to the aircraft in which the training is given, provided the training is given in accordance with the privileges of the certificate and conducted in accordance with an approved air carrier training program approved under part 121 or part 135 of this chapter; (iii) Under paragraph (d)(2) of this section, if the training is given by a person who is qualified in accordance with subpart C of part 142 of this chapter, provided the training is conducted in accordance with an approved part 142 training program; (iv) Under paragraphs (d)(2)(i), (d)(2)(ii)(C), and (d)(2)(iii) of this section, if the training is given by the holder of a ground instructor certificate in accordance with the privileges of the certificate; or
  (v) Under paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of this section, if the training is given by an authorized flight instructor under § 61.41 of this part.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (e) Instrument rating. No person may act as pilot in command of a civil aircraft under IFR or in weather conditions less than the minimums prescribed for VFR flight unless that person holds: (1) The appropriate aircraft category, class, type (if required), and instrument rating on that person’s pilot certificate for any airplane, helicopter, or powered-lift being flown; (2) An airline transport pilot certificate with the appropriate aircraft category, class, and type rating (if required) for the aircraft being flown; (3) For a glider, a pilot certificate with a glider category rating and an airplane instrument rating; or (4) For an airship, a commercial pilot certificate with a lighter-than-air category rating and airship class rating.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (f) Category II pilot authorization. Except for a pilot conducting Category II operations under part 121 or part 135, a person may not: (1) Act as pilot in command of a civil aircraft during Category II operations unless that person—
  (i) Holds a Category II pilot authorization for that category or class of aircraft, and the type of aircraft, if applicable; or
  (ii) In the case of a civil aircraft of foreign registry, is authorized by the country of registry to act as pilot in command of that aircraft in Category II operations. (2) Act as second in command of a civil aircraft during Category II operations unless that person—
  (i) Holds a pilot certificate with category and class ratings for that aircraft and an instrument rating for that category aircraft;
  (ii) Holds an airline transport pilot certificate with category and class ratings for that aircraft; or (iii) In the case of a civil aircraft of foreign registry, is authorized by the country of registry to act as second in command of that aircraft during Category II operations.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (g) Category III pilot authorization. Except for a pilot conducting Category III operations under part 121 or part 135, a person may not: (1) Act as pilot in command of a civil aircraft during Category III operations unless that person—
  (i) Holds a Category III pilot authorization for that category or class of aircraft, and the type of aircraft, if applicable; or
  (ii) In the case of a civil aircraft of foreign registry, is authorized by the country of registry to act as pilot in command of that aircraft in Category III operations. (2) Act as second in command of a civil aircraft during Category III operations unless that person—
  (i) Holds a pilot certificate with category and class ratings for that aircraft and an instrument rating for that category aircraft;
  (ii) Holds an airline transport pilot certificate with category and class ratings for that aircraft; or (iii) In the case of a civil aircraft of foreign registry, is authorized by the country of registry to act as second in command of that aircraft during Category III operations.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (h) Category A aircraft pilot authorization. The Administrator may issue a certificate of authorization for a Category II or Category III operation to the pilot of a small aircraft that is a Category A aircraft, as identified in § 97.3(b)(1) of this chapter if: (1) The Administrator determines that the Category II or Category III operation can be performed safely by that pilot under the terms of the certificate of authorization; and (2) The Category II or Category III operation does not involve the carriage of persons or property for compensation or hire.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (i) Ground instructor certificate. (1) Each person who holds a ground instructor certificate issued under this part must have that certificate or a temporary document issued under § 61.29(e) in that person’s physical possession or immediately accessible when exercising the privileges of that certificate. (2) Except as provided in paragraph (i)(3) of this section, no person other than the holder of a ground instructor certificate, issued under this part or part 143, with the appropriate rating on that certificate may—
  (i) Give ground training required to qualify a person for solo flight and solo cross-country flight;
  (ii) Endorse an applicant for a knowledge test required for a pilot, flight instructor, or ground instructor certificate or rating issued under this part; or (iii) Endorse a pilot logbook to show ground training given. (3) A ground instructor certificate issued under this part is not necessary—
  (i) Under paragraph (i)(2) of this section, if the training is given by the holder of a flight instructor certificate issued under this part in accordance with the privileges of that certificate;
  (ii) Under paragraph (i)(2) of this section, if the training is given by the holder of a commercial pilot certificate with a lighter-than-air rating, provided the training is given in accordance with the privileges of the certificate in a lighter-than-air aircraft; (iii) Under paragraph (i)(2) of this section, if the training is given by the holder of an airline transport pilot certificate with a rating appropriate to the aircraft in which the training is given, provided the training is given in accordance with the privileges of the certificate and conducted in accordance with an approved air carrier training program approved under part 121 or part 135 of this chapter;
  (iv) Under paragraph (i)(2) of this section, if the training is given by a person who is qualified in accordance with subpart C of part 142 of this chapter, provided the training is conducted in accordance with an approved part 142 training program; or
  (v) Under paragraph (i)(2)(iii) of this section, if the training is given by an authorized flight instructor under § 61.41 of this part.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (j) Age limitation for certain operations. (1) Age limitation. No person who holds a pilot certificate issued under this part may serve as a pilot on a civil airplane of U.S. registry in the following operations if the person has reached his or her 60th birthday or, in the case of operations with more than one pilot, his or her 65th birthday:
  (i) Scheduled international air services carrying passengers in turbojetpowered airplanes;
  (ii) Scheduled international air services carrying passengers in airplanes having a passenger-seat configuration of more than nine passenger seats, excluding each crewmember seat; (iii) Nonscheduled international air transportation for compensation or hire in airplanes having a passengerseat configuration of more than 30 passenger seats, excluding each crewmember seat; or
  (iv) Scheduled international air services, or nonscheduled international air transportation for compensation or hire, in airplanes having a payload capacity of more than 7,500 pounds. (2) Definitions. (i) ‘‘International air service,’’ as used in this paragraph (j), means scheduled air service performed in airplanes for the public transport of passengers, mail, or cargo, in which the service passes through the airspace over the territory of more than one country. (ii) ‘‘International air transportation,’’ as used in this paragraph (j), means air transportation performed in airplanes for the public transport of passengers, mail, or cargo, in which the service passes through the airspace over the territory of more than one country.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (k) Special purpose pilot authorization. Any person that is required to hold a special purpose pilot authorization, issued in accordance with § 61.77 of this part, must have that authorization and the person’s foreign pilot license in that person’s physical possession or have it readily accessible in the aircraft when exercising the privileges of that authorization.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.3
  § 61.3 Requirement for certificates, ratings, and authorizations
  (l) Inspection of certificate. Each person who holds an airman certificate, temporary document in accordance with paragraph (a)(1)(v) or (vi) of this section, medical certificate, documents establishing alternative medical qualification under part 68 of this chapter, authorization, or license required by this part must present it and their photo identification as described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section for inspection upon a request from: (1) The Administrator; (2) An authorized representative of the National Transportation Safety Board; (3) Any Federal, State, or local law enforcement officer; or (4) An authorized representative of the Transportation Security Administration.

--- G-18 What do I need to legally carry passengers?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.57(a)
expected key facts:
  - 3 takeoffs and landings
  - within the preceding 90 days
  - same category and class
  - same type if a type rating is required

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (a) General experience. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, no person may act as a pilot in command of an aircraft carrying passengers or of an aircraft certificated for more than one pilot flight crewmember unless that person has made at least three takeoffs and three landings within the preceding 90 days, and—
  (i) The person acted as the sole manipulator of the flight controls; and
  (ii) The required takeoffs and landings were performed in an aircraft of the same category, class, and type (if a type rating is required), and, if the aircraft to be flown is an airplane with a tailwheel, the takeoffs and landings must have been made to a full stop in an airplane with a tailwheel. (2) For the purpose of meeting the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this section, a person may act as a pilot in command of an aircraft under day VFR or day IFR, provided no persons or property are carried on board the aircraft, other than those necessary for the conduct of the flight. (3) The takeoffs and landings required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section may be accomplished in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is—
  (i) Approved by the Administrator for landings; and
  (ii) Used in accordance with an approved course conducted by a training center certificated under part 142 of this chapter.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (b) Night takeoff and landing experience. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, no person may act as pilot in command of an aircraft carrying passengers during the period beginning 1 hour after sunset and ending 1 hour before sunrise, unless within the preceding 90 days that person has made at least three takeoffs and three landings to a full stop during the period beginning 1 hour after sunset and ending 1 hour before sunrise, and—
  (i) That person acted as sole manipulator of the flight controls; and
  (ii) The required takeoffs and landings were performed in an aircraft of the same category, class, and type (if a type rating is required). (2) The takeoffs and landings required by paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be accomplished in a full flight simulator that is—
  (i) Approved by the Administrator for takeoffs and landings, if the visual system is adjusted to represent the period described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section; and
  (ii) Used in accordance with an approved course conducted by a training center certificated under part 142 of this chapter.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (c) Instrument experience. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, a person may act as pilot in command under IFR or weather conditions less than the minimums prescribed for VFR only if: (1) Use of an airplane, powered-lift, helicopter, or airship for maintaining instrument experience. Within the 6 calendar months preceding the month of the flight, that person performed and logged at least the following tasks and iterations in an airplane, powered-lift, helicopter, or airship, as appropriate, for the instrument rating privileges to be maintained in actual weather conditions, or under simulated conditions using a view-limiting device that involves having performed the following—
  (i) Six instrument approaches.
  (ii) Holding procedures and tasks. (iii) Intercepting and tracking courses through the use of navigational electronic systems. (2) Use of a full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device for maintaining instrument experience. A pilot may accomplish the requirements in paragraph (c)(1) of this section in a full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device provided the device represents the category of aircraft for the instrument rating privileges to be maintained and the pilot performs the tasks and iterations in simulated instrument conditions. A person may complete the instrument experience in any combination of an aircraft, full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device. (3) Maintaining instrument recent experience in a glider.
  (i) Within the 6 calendar months preceding the month of the flight, that person must have performed and logged at least the following instrument currency tasks, iterations, and flight time, and the instrument currency must have been performed in actual weather conditions or under simulated weather conditions—(A) One hour of instrument flight time in a glider or in a single engine airplane using a view-limiting device while performing interception and tracking courses through the use of navigation electronic systems. (B) Two hours of instrument flight time in a glider or a single engine airplane with the use of a view-limiting device while performing straight glides, turns to specific headings, steep turns, flight at various airspeeds, navigation, and slow flight and stalls.
  (ii) Before a pilot is allowed to carry a passenger in a glider under IFR or in weather conditions less than the minimums prescribed for VFR, that pilot must—(A) Have logged and performed 2 hours of instrument flight time in a glider within the 6 calendar months preceding the month of the flight. (B) Use a view-limiting-device while practicing performance maneuvers, performance airspeeds, navigation, slow flight, and stalls.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (d) Instrument proficiency check. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, a person who has failed to meet the instrument experience requirements of paragraph (c) of this section for more than six calendar months may reestablish instrument currency only by completing an instrument proficiency check. The instrument proficiency check must consist of at least the following areas of operation:
  (i) Air traffic control clearances and procedures;
  (ii) Flight by reference to instruments; (iii) Navigation systems;
  (iv) Instrument approach procedures;
  (v) Emergency operations; and
  (vi) Postflight procedures. (2) The instrument proficiency check must be—
  (i) In an aircraft that is appropriate to the aircraft category;
  (ii) For other than a glider, in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of the aircraft category; or (iii) For a glider, in a single-engine airplane or a glider. (3) The instrument proficiency check must be given by—
  (i) An examiner;
  (ii) A person authorized by the U.S. Armed Forces to conduct instrument flight tests, provided the person being tested is a member of the U.S. Armed Forces; (iii) A company check pilot who is authorized to conduct instrument flight tests under part 121, 125, or 135 of this chapter or subpart K of part 91 of this chapter, and provided that both the check pilot and the pilot being tested are employees of that operator or fractional ownership program manager, as applicable;
  (iv) An authorized instructor; or
  (v) A person approved by the Administrator to conduct instrument practical tests.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (e) Exceptions. (1) Paragraphs (a) and
  (b) of this section do not apply to a pilot in command who is employed by a part 119 certificate holder authorized to conduct operations under part 125 when the pilot is engaged in a flight operation for that certificate holder if the pilot in command is in compliance with §§ 125.281 and 125.285 of this chapter. (2) This section does not apply to a pilot in command who is employed by a part 119 certificate holder authorized to conduct operations under part 121 when the pilot is engaged in a flight operation under part 91 or 121 for that certificate holder if the pilot in command complies with §§ 121.436 and 121.439 of this chapter. (3) This section does not apply to a pilot in command who is employed by a part 119 certificate holder authorized to conduct operations under part 135 when the pilot is engaged in a flight operation under parts 91 or 135 for that certificate holder if the pilot in command is in compliance with §§ 135.243 and 135.247 of this chapter. (4) Paragraph (b) of this section does not apply to a pilot in command of a turbine-powered airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember, provided that pilot has complied with the requirements of paragraph (e)(4)(i) or (ii) of this section:
  (i) The pilot in command must hold at least a commercial pilot certificate with the appropriate category, class, and type rating for each airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative, and: (A) That pilot must have logged at least 1,500 hours of aeronautical experience as a pilot; (B) In each airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative, that pilot must have accomplished and logged the daytime takeoff and landing recent flight experience of paragraph (a) of this section, as the sole manipulator of the flight controls; (C) Within the preceding 90 days prior to the operation of that airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember, the pilot must have accomplished and logged at least 15 hours of flight time in the type of airplane that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative; and (D) That pilot has accomplished and logged at least 3 takeoffs and 3 landings to a full stop, as the sole manipulator of the flight controls, in a turbine-powered airplane that requires more than one pilot crewmember. The pilot must have performed the takeoffs and landings during the period beginning 1 hour after sunset and ending 1 hour before sunrise within the preceding 6 months prior to the month of the flight.
  (ii) The pilot in command must hold at least a commercial pilot certificate with the appropriate category, class, and type rating for each airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative, and: (A) That pilot must have logged at least 1,500 hours of aeronautical experience as a pilot; (B) In each airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative, that pilot must have accomplished and logged the daytime takeoff and landing recent flight experience of paragraph (a) of this section, as the sole manipulator of the flight controls; (C) Within the preceding 90 days prior to the operation of that airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember, the pilot must have accomplished and logged at least 15 hours of flight time in the type of airplane that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative; and (D) Within the preceding 12 months prior to the month of the flight, the pilot must have completed a training program that is approved under part 142 of this chapter. The approved training program must have required and the pilot must have performed, at least 6 takeoffs and 6 landings to a full stop as the sole manipulator of the controls in a full flight simulator that is representative of a turbine-powered airplane that requires more than one pilot crewmember. The full flight simulator’s visual system must have been adjusted to represent the period beginning 1 hour after sunset and ending 1 hour before sunrise.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (f) Night vision goggle operating experience. (1) A person may act as pilot in command in a night vision goggle operation with passengers on board only if, within 2 calendar months preceding the month of the flight, that person performs and logs the following tasks as the sole manipulator of the controls on a flight during a night vision goggle operation—
  (i) Three takeoffs and three landings, with each takeoff and landing including a climbout, cruise, descent, and approach phase of flight (only required if the pilot wants to use night vision goggles during the takeoff and landing phases of the flight).
  (ii) Three hovering tasks (only required if the pilot wants to use night vision goggles when operating helicopters or powered-lifts during the hovering phase of flight). (iii) Three area departure and area arrival tasks.
  (iv) Three tasks of transitioning from aided night flight ( aided night flight means that the pilot uses night vision goggles to maintain visual surface reference) to unaided night flight ( unaided night flight means that the pilot does not use night vision goggles) and back to aided night flight.
  (v) Three night vision goggle operations, or when operating helicopters or powered-lifts, six night vision goggle operations. (2) A person may act as pilot in command using night vision goggles only if, within the 4 calendar months preceding the month of the flight, that person performs and logs the tasks listed in paragraph (f)(1)(i) through (v) of this section as the sole manipulator of the controls during a night vision goggle operation.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (g) Night vision goggle proficiency check. A person must either meet the night vision goggle experience requirements of paragraphs (f)(1) or (f)(2) of this section or pass a night vision goggle proficiency check to act as pilot in command using night vision goggles. The proficiency check must be performed in the category of aircraft that is appropriate to the night vision goggle operation for which the person is seeking the night vision goggle privilege or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of that category of aircraft. The check must consist of the tasks listed in § 61.31(k), and the check must be performed by: (1) An Examiner who is qualified to perform night vision goggle operations in that same aircraft category and class; (2) A person who is authorized by the U.S. Armed Forces to perform night vision goggle proficiency checks, provided the person being administered the check is also a member of the U.S. Armed Forces; (3) A company check pilot who is authorized to perform night vision goggle proficiency checks under parts 121, 125, or 135 of this chapter, provided that both the check pilot and the pilot being tested are employees of that operator; (4) An authorized flight instructor who is qualified to perform night vision goggle operations in that same aircraft category and class; (5) A person who is qualified as pilot in command for night vision goggle operations in accordance with paragraph
  (f) of this section; or (6) A person approved by the FAA to perform night vision goggle proficiency checks.

--- G-19 Am I current to fly passengers at night?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.57(b)
expected key facts:
  - 3 takeoffs and 3 landings to a full stop
  - within the preceding 90 days
  - during the period 1 hour after sunset to 1 hour before sunrise

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (a) General experience. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, no person may act as a pilot in command of an aircraft carrying passengers or of an aircraft certificated for more than one pilot flight crewmember unless that person has made at least three takeoffs and three landings within the preceding 90 days, and—
  (i) The person acted as the sole manipulator of the flight controls; and
  (ii) The required takeoffs and landings were performed in an aircraft of the same category, class, and type (if a type rating is required), and, if the aircraft to be flown is an airplane with a tailwheel, the takeoffs and landings must have been made to a full stop in an airplane with a tailwheel. (2) For the purpose of meeting the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this section, a person may act as a pilot in command of an aircraft under day VFR or day IFR, provided no persons or property are carried on board the aircraft, other than those necessary for the conduct of the flight. (3) The takeoffs and landings required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section may be accomplished in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is—
  (i) Approved by the Administrator for landings; and
  (ii) Used in accordance with an approved course conducted by a training center certificated under part 142 of this chapter.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (b) Night takeoff and landing experience. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, no person may act as pilot in command of an aircraft carrying passengers during the period beginning 1 hour after sunset and ending 1 hour before sunrise, unless within the preceding 90 days that person has made at least three takeoffs and three landings to a full stop during the period beginning 1 hour after sunset and ending 1 hour before sunrise, and—
  (i) That person acted as sole manipulator of the flight controls; and
  (ii) The required takeoffs and landings were performed in an aircraft of the same category, class, and type (if a type rating is required). (2) The takeoffs and landings required by paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be accomplished in a full flight simulator that is—
  (i) Approved by the Administrator for takeoffs and landings, if the visual system is adjusted to represent the period described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section; and
  (ii) Used in accordance with an approved course conducted by a training center certificated under part 142 of this chapter.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (c) Instrument experience. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, a person may act as pilot in command under IFR or weather conditions less than the minimums prescribed for VFR only if: (1) Use of an airplane, powered-lift, helicopter, or airship for maintaining instrument experience. Within the 6 calendar months preceding the month of the flight, that person performed and logged at least the following tasks and iterations in an airplane, powered-lift, helicopter, or airship, as appropriate, for the instrument rating privileges to be maintained in actual weather conditions, or under simulated conditions using a view-limiting device that involves having performed the following—
  (i) Six instrument approaches.
  (ii) Holding procedures and tasks. (iii) Intercepting and tracking courses through the use of navigational electronic systems. (2) Use of a full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device for maintaining instrument experience. A pilot may accomplish the requirements in paragraph (c)(1) of this section in a full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device provided the device represents the category of aircraft for the instrument rating privileges to be maintained and the pilot performs the tasks and iterations in simulated instrument conditions. A person may complete the instrument experience in any combination of an aircraft, full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device. (3) Maintaining instrument recent experience in a glider.
  (i) Within the 6 calendar months preceding the month of the flight, that person must have performed and logged at least the following instrument currency tasks, iterations, and flight time, and the instrument currency must have been performed in actual weather conditions or under simulated weather conditions—(A) One hour of instrument flight time in a glider or in a single engine airplane using a view-limiting device while performing interception and tracking courses through the use of navigation electronic systems. (B) Two hours of instrument flight time in a glider or a single engine airplane with the use of a view-limiting device while performing straight glides, turns to specific headings, steep turns, flight at various airspeeds, navigation, and slow flight and stalls.
  (ii) Before a pilot is allowed to carry a passenger in a glider under IFR or in weather conditions less than the minimums prescribed for VFR, that pilot must—(A) Have logged and performed 2 hours of instrument flight time in a glider within the 6 calendar months preceding the month of the flight. (B) Use a view-limiting-device while practicing performance maneuvers, performance airspeeds, navigation, slow flight, and stalls.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (d) Instrument proficiency check. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, a person who has failed to meet the instrument experience requirements of paragraph (c) of this section for more than six calendar months may reestablish instrument currency only by completing an instrument proficiency check. The instrument proficiency check must consist of at least the following areas of operation:
  (i) Air traffic control clearances and procedures;
  (ii) Flight by reference to instruments; (iii) Navigation systems;
  (iv) Instrument approach procedures;
  (v) Emergency operations; and
  (vi) Postflight procedures. (2) The instrument proficiency check must be—
  (i) In an aircraft that is appropriate to the aircraft category;
  (ii) For other than a glider, in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of the aircraft category; or (iii) For a glider, in a single-engine airplane or a glider. (3) The instrument proficiency check must be given by—
  (i) An examiner;
  (ii) A person authorized by the U.S. Armed Forces to conduct instrument flight tests, provided the person being tested is a member of the U.S. Armed Forces; (iii) A company check pilot who is authorized to conduct instrument flight tests under part 121, 125, or 135 of this chapter or subpart K of part 91 of this chapter, and provided that both the check pilot and the pilot being tested are employees of that operator or fractional ownership program manager, as applicable;
  (iv) An authorized instructor; or
  (v) A person approved by the Administrator to conduct instrument practical tests.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (e) Exceptions. (1) Paragraphs (a) and
  (b) of this section do not apply to a pilot in command who is employed by a part 119 certificate holder authorized to conduct operations under part 125 when the pilot is engaged in a flight operation for that certificate holder if the pilot in command is in compliance with §§ 125.281 and 125.285 of this chapter. (2) This section does not apply to a pilot in command who is employed by a part 119 certificate holder authorized to conduct operations under part 121 when the pilot is engaged in a flight operation under part 91 or 121 for that certificate holder if the pilot in command complies with §§ 121.436 and 121.439 of this chapter. (3) This section does not apply to a pilot in command who is employed by a part 119 certificate holder authorized to conduct operations under part 135 when the pilot is engaged in a flight operation under parts 91 or 135 for that certificate holder if the pilot in command is in compliance with §§ 135.243 and 135.247 of this chapter. (4) Paragraph (b) of this section does not apply to a pilot in command of a turbine-powered airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember, provided that pilot has complied with the requirements of paragraph (e)(4)(i) or (ii) of this section:
  (i) The pilot in command must hold at least a commercial pilot certificate with the appropriate category, class, and type rating for each airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative, and: (A) That pilot must have logged at least 1,500 hours of aeronautical experience as a pilot; (B) In each airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative, that pilot must have accomplished and logged the daytime takeoff and landing recent flight experience of paragraph (a) of this section, as the sole manipulator of the flight controls; (C) Within the preceding 90 days prior to the operation of that airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember, the pilot must have accomplished and logged at least 15 hours of flight time in the type of airplane that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative; and (D) That pilot has accomplished and logged at least 3 takeoffs and 3 landings to a full stop, as the sole manipulator of the flight controls, in a turbine-powered airplane that requires more than one pilot crewmember. The pilot must have performed the takeoffs and landings during the period beginning 1 hour after sunset and ending 1 hour before sunrise within the preceding 6 months prior to the month of the flight.
  (ii) The pilot in command must hold at least a commercial pilot certificate with the appropriate category, class, and type rating for each airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative, and: (A) That pilot must have logged at least 1,500 hours of aeronautical experience as a pilot; (B) In each airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative, that pilot must have accomplished and logged the daytime takeoff and landing recent flight experience of paragraph (a) of this section, as the sole manipulator of the flight controls; (C) Within the preceding 90 days prior to the operation of that airplane that is type certificated for more than one pilot crewmember, the pilot must have accomplished and logged at least 15 hours of flight time in the type of airplane that the pilot seeks to operate under this alternative; and (D) Within the preceding 12 months prior to the month of the flight, the pilot must have completed a training program that is approved under part 142 of this chapter. The approved training program must have required and the pilot must have performed, at least 6 takeoffs and 6 landings to a full stop as the sole manipulator of the controls in a full flight simulator that is representative of a turbine-powered airplane that requires more than one pilot crewmember. The full flight simulator’s visual system must have been adjusted to represent the period beginning 1 hour after sunset and ending 1 hour before sunrise.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (f) Night vision goggle operating experience. (1) A person may act as pilot in command in a night vision goggle operation with passengers on board only if, within 2 calendar months preceding the month of the flight, that person performs and logs the following tasks as the sole manipulator of the controls on a flight during a night vision goggle operation—
  (i) Three takeoffs and three landings, with each takeoff and landing including a climbout, cruise, descent, and approach phase of flight (only required if the pilot wants to use night vision goggles during the takeoff and landing phases of the flight).
  (ii) Three hovering tasks (only required if the pilot wants to use night vision goggles when operating helicopters or powered-lifts during the hovering phase of flight). (iii) Three area departure and area arrival tasks.
  (iv) Three tasks of transitioning from aided night flight ( aided night flight means that the pilot uses night vision goggles to maintain visual surface reference) to unaided night flight ( unaided night flight means that the pilot does not use night vision goggles) and back to aided night flight.
  (v) Three night vision goggle operations, or when operating helicopters or powered-lifts, six night vision goggle operations. (2) A person may act as pilot in command using night vision goggles only if, within the 4 calendar months preceding the month of the flight, that person performs and logs the tasks listed in paragraph (f)(1)(i) through (v) of this section as the sole manipulator of the controls during a night vision goggle operation.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.57
  § 61.57 Recent flight experience: Pilot in command
  (g) Night vision goggle proficiency check. A person must either meet the night vision goggle experience requirements of paragraphs (f)(1) or (f)(2) of this section or pass a night vision goggle proficiency check to act as pilot in command using night vision goggles. The proficiency check must be performed in the category of aircraft that is appropriate to the night vision goggle operation for which the person is seeking the night vision goggle privilege or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of that category of aircraft. The check must consist of the tasks listed in § 61.31(k), and the check must be performed by: (1) An Examiner who is qualified to perform night vision goggle operations in that same aircraft category and class; (2) A person who is authorized by the U.S. Armed Forces to perform night vision goggle proficiency checks, provided the person being administered the check is also a member of the U.S. Armed Forces; (3) A company check pilot who is authorized to perform night vision goggle proficiency checks under parts 121, 125, or 135 of this chapter, provided that both the check pilot and the pilot being tested are employees of that operator; (4) An authorized flight instructor who is qualified to perform night vision goggle operations in that same aircraft category and class; (5) A person who is qualified as pilot in command for night vision goggle operations in accordance with paragraph
  (f) of this section; or (6) A person approved by the FAA to perform night vision goggle proficiency checks.

--- G-20 How often do I need a flight review?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.56
expected key facts:
  - within the preceding 24 calendar months
  - minimum 1 hour of ground training
  - minimum 1 hour of flight training

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.56
  § 61.56 Flight review
  (a) Except as provided in paragraphs
  (b) and (f) of this section, a flight review consists of a minimum of 1 hour of flight training and 1 hour of ground training. The review must include: (1) A review of the current general operating and flight rules of part 91 of this chapter; and (2) A review of those maneuvers and procedures that, at the discretion of the person giving the review, are necessary for the pilot to demonstrate the safe exercise of the privileges of the pilot certificate.
  (b) Glider pilots may substitute a minimum of three instructional flights in a glider, each of which includes a flight to traffic pattern altitude, in lieu of the 1 hour of flight training required in paragraph (a) of this section.
  (c) Except as provided in paragraphs (d), (e), and (g) of this section, no person may act as pilot in command of an aircraft unless, since the beginning of the 24th calendar month before the month in which that pilot acts as pilot in command, that person has—(1) Accomplished a flight review given in an aircraft for which that pilot is rated by an authorized instructor and (2) A logbook endorsed from an authorized instructor who gave the review certifying that the person has satisfactorily completed the review.
  (d) A person who has, within the period specified in paragraph (c) of this section, passed any of the following need not accomplish the flight review required by this section: (1) A pilot proficiency check or practical test conducted by an examiner, an approved pilot check airman, or a U.S. Armed Force, for a pilot certificate, rating, or operating privilege. (2) A practical test conducted by an examiner for the issuance of a flight instructor certificate, an additional rating on a flight instructor certificate, renewal of a flight instructor certificate, or reinstatement of a flight instructor certificate.
  (e) A person who has, within the period specified in paragraph (c) of this section, satisfactorily accomplished one or more phases of an FAA-sponsored pilot proficiency award program need not accomplish the flight review required by this section.
  (f) A person who holds a flight instructor certificate and who has, within the period specified in paragraph (c) of this section, satisfactorily completed a renewal of a flight instructor certificate under the provisions in § 61.197 need not accomplish the one hour of ground training specified in paragraph (a) of this section.
  (g) A student pilot need not accomplish the flight review required by this section provided the student pilot is undergoing training for a certificate and has a current solo flight endorsement as required under § 61.87 of this part.
  (h) The requirements of this section may be accomplished in combination with the requirements of § 61.57 and other applicable recent experience requirements at the discretion of the authorized instructor conducting the flight review.
  (i) A flight simulator or flight training device may be used to meet the flight review requirements of this section subject to the following conditions: (1) The flight simulator or flight training device must be used in accordance with an approved course conducted by a training center certificated under part 142 of this chapter. (2) Unless the flight review is undertaken in a flight simulator that is approved for landings, the applicant must meet the takeoff and landing requirements of § 61.57(a) or § 61.57(b) of this part. (3) The flight simulator or flight training device used must represent an aircraft or set of aircraft for which the pilot is rated.

--- G-21 How long is my third-class medical valid?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.23(d)
expected key facts:
  - under age 40 at examination: 60 calendar months
  - age 40 or older at examination: 24 calendar months

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.23
  § 61.23 Medical certificates: Requirement and duration
  (a) Operations requiring a medical certificate. Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, a person—(1) Must hold a first-class medical certificate:
  (i) When exercising the pilot-in-command privileges of an airline transport pilot certificate;
  (ii) When exercising the second-incommand privileges of an airline transport pilot certificate in a flag or supplemental operation in part 121 of this chapter that requires three or more pilots; or (iii) When serving as a required pilot flightcrew member in an operation conducted under part 121 of this chapter if the pilot has reached his or her 60th birthday. (2) Must hold at least a second class medical certificate when exercising:
  (i) Second-in-command privileges of an airline transport pilot certificate in part 121 of this chapter (other than operations specified in paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section);
  (ii) Privileges of a commercial pilot certificate in an aircraft other than a balloon or glider; or (iii) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(5) of this section, privileges of a commercial pilot certificate with a balloon class rating for compensation or hire; or (3) Must hold at least a third-class medical certificate—
  (i) When exercising the privileges of a private pilot certificate, recreational pilot certificate, or student pilot certificate, except when operating under the conditions and limitations set forth in § 61.113(i);
  (ii) When exercising the privileges of a flight instructor certificate and acting as the pilot in command or as a required flightcrew member, except when operating under the conditions and limitations set forth in § 61.113(i); (iii) When taking a practical test in an aircraft for a recreational pilot, private pilot, commercial pilot, or airline transport pilot certificate, or for a flight instructor certificate, except when operating under the conditions and limitations set forth in § 61.113(i); or
  (iv) When performing the duties as an Examiner in an aircraft when administering a practical test or proficiency check for an airman certificate, rating, or authorization.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.23
  § 61.23 Medical certificates: Requirement and duration
  (b) Operations not requiring a medical certificate. A person is not required to hold a medical certificate—(1) When exercising the privileges of a student pilot certificate while seeking—
  (i) A sport pilot certificate with glider or balloon privileges; or
  (ii) A pilot certificate with a glider category rating or balloon class rating; (2) When exercising the privileges of a sport pilot certificate with privileges in a glider or balloon; (3) When exercising the privileges of a pilot certificate with a glider category rating in a glider; (4) When exercising the privileges of a private pilot certificate with a balloon class rating in a balloon; (5) When exercising the privileges of a commercial pilot certificate with a balloon class rating in a balloon if the person is providing flight training in accordance with § 61.133(a)(2)(ii); (6) When exercising the privileges of a flight instructor certificate with—
  (i) A sport pilot rating in a glider or balloon; or
  (ii) A glider category rating; (7) When exercising the privileges of a flight instructor certificate if the person is not acting as pilot in command or serving as a required pilot flight crewmember; (8) When exercising the privileges of a ground instructor certificate; (9) When serving as an Examiner or check airman and administering a practical test or proficiency check for an airman certificate, rating, or authorization conducted in a glider, balloon, flight simulator, or flight training device; (10) When taking a practical test or a proficiency check for a certificate, rating, authorization or operating privilege conducted in a glider, balloon, flight simulator, or flight training device; (11) When a military pilot of the U.S. Armed Forces can show evidence of an up-to-date medical examination authorizing pilot flight status issued by the U.S. Armed Forces and—
  (i) The flight does not require higher than a third-class medical certificate; and
  (ii) The flight conducted is a domestic flight operation within U.S. airspace; or (12) When exercising the privileges of a student pilot certificate or higher while acting as pilot in command on a special medical flight test authorized under part 67 of this chapter.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.23
  § 61.23 Medical certificates: Requirement and duration
  (c) Operations requiring either a medical certificate or U.S. driver’s license. (1) A person must hold and possess either a medical certificate issued under part 67 of this chapter or a U.S. driver’s license when—
  (i) Exercising the privileges of a student pilot certificate while seeking sport pilot privileges in a light-sport aircraft other than a glider or balloon;
  (ii) Exercising the privileges of a sport pilot certificate in a light-sport aircraft other than a glider or balloon; (iii) Exercising the privileges of a flight instructor certificate with a sport pilot rating while acting as pilot in command or serving as a required flight crewmember of a light-sport aircraft other than a glider or balloon;
  (iv) Serving as an Examiner and administering a practical test for the issuance of a sport pilot certificate in a light-sport aircraft other than a glider or balloon;
  (v) Exercising the privileges of a student, recreational or private pilot certificate if the flight is conducted under the conditions and limitations set forth in § 61.113(i); or
  (vi) Exercising the privileges of a flight instructor certificate and acting as the pilot in command or as a required flight crewmember if the flight is conducted under the conditions and limitations set forth in § 61.113(i). (2) A person using a U.S. driver’s license to meet the requirements of paragraph (c) while exercising sport pilot privileges must—
  (i) Comply with each restriction and limitation imposed by that person’s U.S. driver’s license and any judicial or administrative order applying to the operation of a motor vehicle;
  (ii) Have been found eligible for the issuance of at least a third-class airman medical certificate at the time of his or her most recent application (if the person has applied for a medical certificate); (iii) Not have had his or her most recently issued medical certificate (if the person has held a medical certificate) suspended or revoked or most recent Authorization for a Special Issuance of a Medical Certificate withdrawn; and
  (iv) Not know or have reason to know of any medical condition that would make that person unable to operate a light-sport aircraft in a safe manner. (3) A person using a U.S. driver’s license to meet the requirements of paragraph (c) while operating under the conditions and limitations of § 61.113(i) must meet the following requirements—
  (i) The person must—(A) Comply with all medical requirements or restrictions associated with his or her U.S. driver’s license; (B) At any point after July 14, 2006, have held a medical certificate issued under part 67 of this chapter; (C) Complete the medical education course set forth in § 68.3 of this chapter during the 24 calendar months before acting as pilot in command or serving as a required flightcrew member in an operation conducted under § 61.113(i) and retain a certification of course completion in accordance with § 68.3(b)(1) of this chapter; (D) Receive a comprehensive medical examination from a State-licensed physician during the 48 months before acting as pilot in command or serving as a required flightcrew member of an operation conducted under § 61.113(i) and that medical examination is conducted in accordance with the requirements in part 68 of this chapter; and (E) If the individual has been diagnosed with any medical condition that may impact the ability of the individual to fly, be under the care and treatment of a State-licensed physician when acting as pilot in command or serving as a required flightcrew member of an operation conducted under § 61.113(i).
  (ii) The most recently issued medical certificate—(A) May include an authorization for special issuance; (B) May be expired; and (C) Cannot have been suspended or revoked. (iii) The most recently issued Authorization for a Special Issuance of a Medical Certificate cannot have been withdrawn; and
  (iv) The most recent application for an airman medical certificate submitted to the FAA cannot have been completed and denied.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.23
  § 61.23 Medical certificates: Requirement and duration
  (d) Duration of a medical certificate. Use the following table to determine duration for each class of medical certificate:

--- G-22 What are the minimum flight hours for a private pilot certificate?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.109(a)
expected key facts:
  - 40 hours total flight time
  - 20 hours dual instruction
  - 10 hours solo flight time
  - 5 hours solo cross-country
  - 3 hours night dual training with 10 takeoffs and landings
  - 3 hours instrument training

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (a) For an airplane single-engine rating. Except as provided in paragraph
  (k) of this section, a person who applies for a private pilot certificate with an airplane category and single-engine class rating must log at least 40 hours of flight time that includes at least 20 hours of flight training from an authorized instructor and 10 hours of solo flight training in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(1) of this part, and the training must include at least—(1) 3 hours of cross-country flight training in a single-engine airplane; (2) Except as provided in § 61.110 of this part, 3 hours of night flight training in a single-engine airplane that includes—
  (i) One cross-country flight of over 100 nautical miles total distance; and
  (ii) 10 takeoffs and 10 landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport. (3) 3 hours of flight training in a single-engine airplane on the control and maneuvering of an airplane solely by reference to instruments, including straight and level flight, constant airspeed climbs and descents, turns to a heading, recovery from unusual flight attitudes, radio communications, and the use of navigation systems/facilities and radar services appropriate to instrument flight; (4) 3 hours of flight training with an authorized instructor in a single-engine airplane in preparation for the practical test, which must have been performed within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test; and (5) 10 hours of solo flight time in a single-engine airplane, consisting of at least—
  (i) 5 hours of solo cross-country time;
  (ii) One solo cross country flight of 150 nautical miles total distance, with full-stop landings at three points, and one segment of the flight consisting of a straight-line distance of more than 50 nautical miles between the takeoff and landing locations; and (iii) Three takeoffs and three landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport with an operating control tower.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (b) For an airplane multiengine rating. Except as provided in paragraph (k) of this section, a person who applies for a private pilot certificate with an airplane category and multiengine class rating must log at least 40 hours of flight time that includes at least 20 hours of flight training from an authorized instructor and 10 hours of solo flight training in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(2) of this part, and the training must include at least—(1) 3 hours of cross-country flight training in a multiengine airplane; (2) Except as provided in § 61.110 of this part, 3 hours of night flight training in a multiengine airplane that includes—
  (i) One cross-country flight of over 100 nautical miles total distance; and
  (ii) 10 takeoffs and 10 landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport. (3) 3 hours of flight training in a multiengine airplane on the control and maneuvering of an airplane solely by reference to instruments, including straight and level flight, constant airspeed climbs and descents, turns to a heading, recovery from unusual flight attitudes, radio communications, and the use of navigation systems/facilities and radar services appropriate to instrument flight; (4) 3 hours of flight training with an authorized instructor in a multiengine airplane in preparation for the practical test, which must have been performed within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test; and (5) 10 hours of solo flight time in an airplane consisting of at least—
  (i) 5 hours of solo cross-country time;
  (ii) One solo cross country flight of 150 nautical miles total distance, with full-stop landings at three points, and one segment of the flight consisting of a straight-line distance of more than 50 nautical miles between the takeoff and landing locations; and (iii) Three takeoffs and three landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport with an operating control tower.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (c) For a helicopter rating. Except as provided in paragraph (k) of this section, a person who applies for a private pilot certificate with rotorcraft category and helicopter class rating must log at least 40 hours of flight time that includes at least 20 hours of flight training from an authorized instructor and 10 hours of solo flight training in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(3) of this part, and the training must include at least—(1) 3 hours of cross-country flight training in a helicopter; (2) Except as provided in § 61.110 of this part, 3 hours of night flight training in a helicopter that includes—
  (i) One cross-country flight of over 50 nautical miles total distance; and
  (ii) 10 takeoffs and 10 landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport. (3) 3 hours of flight training with an authorized instructor in a helicopter in preparation for the practical test, which must have been performed within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test; and (4) 10 hours of solo flight time in a helicopter, consisting of at least—
  (i) 3 hours cross-country time;
  (ii) One solo cross country flight of 100 nautical miles total distance, with landings at three points, and one segment of the flight being a straight-line distance of more than 25 nautical miles between the takeoff and landing locations; and (iii) Three takeoffs and three landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport with an operating control tower.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (d) For a gyroplane rating. Except as provided in paragraph (k) of this section, a person who applies for a private pilot certificate with rotorcraft category and gyroplane class rating must log at least 40 hours of flight time that includes at least 20 hours of flight training from an authorized instructor and 10 hours of solo flight training in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(4) of this part, and the training must include at least—(1) 3 hours of cross-country flight training in a gyroplane; (2) Except as provided in § 61.110 of this part, 3 hours of night flight training in a gyroplane that includes—
  (i) One cross-country flight of over 50 nautical miles total distance; and
  (ii) 10 takeoffs and 10 landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport. (3) 3 hours of flight training with an authorized instructor in a gyroplane in preparation for the practical test, which must have been performed within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test; and (4) 10 hours of solo flight time in a gyroplane, consisting of at least—
  (i) 3 hours of cross-country time;
  (ii) One solo cross country flight of 100 nautical miles total distance, with landings at three points, and one segment of the flight being a straight-line distance of more than 25 nautical miles between the takeoff and landing locations; and (iii) Three takeoffs and three landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport with an operating control tower.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (e) For a powered-lift rating. Except as provided in paragraph (k) of this section, a person who applies for a private pilot certificate with a powered-lift category rating must log at least 40 hours of flight time that includes at least 20 hours of flight training from an authorized instructor and 10 hours of solo flight training in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(5) of this part, and the training must include at least—(1) 3 hours of cross-country flight training in a powered-lift; (2) Except as provided in § 61.110 of this part, 3 hours of night flight training in a powered-lift that includes—
  (i) One cross-country flight of over 100 nautical miles total distance; and
  (ii) 10 takeoffs and 10 landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport. (3) 3 hours of flight training in a powered-lift on the control and maneuvering of a powered-lift solely by reference to instruments, including straight and level flight, constant airspeed climbs and descents, turns to a heading, recovery from unusual flight attitudes, radio communications, and the use of navigation systems/facilities and radar services appropriate to instrument flight; (4) 3 hours of flight training with an authorized instructor in a powered-lift in preparation for the practical test, which must have been performed within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test; and (5) 10 hours of solo flight time in an airplane or powered-lift consisting of at least—
  (i) 5 hours cross-country time;
  (ii) One solo cross country flight of 150 nautical miles total distance, with full-stop landings at three points, and one segment of the flight consisting of a straight-line distance of more than 50 nautical miles between the takeoff and landing locations; and (iii) Three takeoffs and three landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport with an operating control tower.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (f) For a glider category rating. (1) If the applicant for a private pilot certificate with a glider category rating has not logged at least 40 hours of flight time as a pilot in a heavier-than-air aircraft, the applicant must log at least 10 hours of flight time in a glider in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(6) of this part, and that flight time must include at least—
  (i) 20 flights in a glider in the areas of operations listed in § 61.107(b)(6) of this part, including at least 3 training flights with an authorized instructor in a glider in preparation for the practical test that must have been performed within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test; and
  (ii) 2 hours of solo flight time in a glider in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(6) of this part, with not less than 10 launches and landings being performed. (2) If the applicant has logged at least 40 hours of flight time in a heavier-than-air aircraft, the applicant must log at least 3 hours of flight time in a glider in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(6) of this part, and that flight time must include at least—
  (i) 10 solo flights in a glider in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(6) of this part; and
  (ii) 3 training flights with an authorized instructor in a glider in preparation for the practical test that must have been performed within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (g) For an airship rating. A person who applies for a private pilot certificate with a lighter-than-air category and airship class rating must log at least: (1) 25 hours of flight training in airships on the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(7) of this part, which consists of at least:
  (i) 3 hours of cross-country flight training in an airship;
  (ii) Except as provided in § 61.110 of this part, 3 hours of night flight training in an airship that includes: (A) A cross-country flight of over 25 nautical miles total distance; and (B) Five takeoffs and five landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport. (2) 3 hours of flight training in an airship on the control and maneuvering of an airship solely by reference to instruments, including straight and level flight, constant airspeed climbs and descents, turns to a heading, recovery from unusual flight attitudes, radio communications, and the use of navigation systems/facilities and radar services appropriate to instrument flight; (3) Three hours of flight training with an authorized instructor in an airship in preparation for the practical test within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test; and (4) 5 hours performing the duties of pilot in command in an airship with an authorized instructor.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (h) For a balloon rating. A person who applies for a private pilot certificate with a lighter-than-air category and balloon class rating must log at least 10 hours of flight training that includes at least six training flights with an authorized instructor in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(8) of this part, that includes—(1) Gas balloon. If the training is being performed in a gas balloon, at least two flights of 2 hours each that consists of—

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (i) At least one training flight with an authorized instructor in a gas balloon in preparation for the practical test within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test;
  (ii) At least one flight performing the duties of pilot in command in a gas balloon with an authorized instructor; and (iii) At least one flight involving a controlled ascent to 3,000 feet above the launch site. (2) Balloon with an airborne heater. If the training is being performed in a balloon with an airborne heater, at least—
  (i) At least two training flights of 1 hour each with an authorized instructor in a balloon with an airborne heater in preparation for the practical test within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test;
  (ii) One solo flight in a balloon with an airborne heater; and (iii) At least one flight involving a controlled ascent to 2,000 feet above the launch site.
  (i) For a powered parachute rating. A person who applies for a private pilot certificate with a powered parachute category rating must log at least 25 hours of flight time in a powered parachute that includes at least 10 hours of flight training with an authorized instructor, including 30 takeoffs and landings, and 10 hours of solo flight training in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107 (b)(9) and the training must include at least—(1) One hour of cross-country flight training in a powered parachute that includes a 1-hour cross-country flight with a landing at an airport at least 25 nautical miles from the airport of departure; (2) Except as provided in § 61.110, 3 hours of night flight training in a powered parachute that includes 10 takeoffs and landings (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport; (3) Three hours of flight training with an authorized instructor in a powered parachute in preparation for the practical test, which must have been performed within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test; (4) Three hours of solo flight time in a powered parachute, consisting of at least—
  (i) One solo cross-country flight with a landing at an airport at least 25 nautical miles from the departure airport; and
  (ii) Twenty solo takeoffs and landings to a full stop (with each landing involving a flight in a traffic pattern) at an airport; and (5) Three takeoffs and landings (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) in an aircraft at an airport with an operating control tower.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (j) For a weight-shift-control aircraft rating. A person who applies for a private pilot certificate with a weightshift-control rating must log at least 40 hours of flight time that includes at least 20 hours of flight training with an authorized instructor and 10 hours of solo flight training in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b)(10) and the training must include at least—(1) Three hours of cross-country flight training in a weight-shift-control aircraft; (2) Except as provided in § 61.110, 3 hours of night flight training in a weight-shift-control aircraft that includes—
  (i) One cross-country flight of over 75 nautical miles total distance that includes a point of landing that is a straight-line distance of more than 50 nautical miles from the original point of departure; and
  (ii) Ten takeoffs and landings (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) at an airport; (3) Three hours of flight training with an authorized instructor in a weight-shift-control aircraft in preparation for the practical test, which must have been performed within the preceding 2 calendar months from the month of the test; (4) Ten hours of solo flight time in a weight-shift-control aircraft, consisting of at least—
  (i) Five hours of solo cross-country time; and
  (ii) One solo cross-country flight over 100 nautical miles total distance, with landings at a minimum of three points, and one segment of the flight being a straight line distance of at least 50 nautical miles between takeoff and landing locations; and (5) Three takeoffs and landings (with each landing involving a flight in the traffic pattern) in an aircraft at an airport with an operating control tower.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (k) Permitted credit for use of a full flight simulator or flight training device. (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (k)(2) of this section, a maximum of 2.5 hours of training in a full flight simulator or flight training device representing the category, class, and type, if applicable, of aircraft appropriate to the rating sought, may be credited toward the flight training time required by this section, if received from an authorized instructor. (2) A maximum of 5 hours of training in a flight simulator or flight training device representing the category, class, and type, if applicable, of aircraft appropriate to the rating sought, may be credited toward the flight training time required by this section if the training is accomplished in a course conducted by a training center certificated under part 142 of this chapter. (3) Except when fewer hours are approved by the Administrator, an applicant for a private pilot certificate with an airplane, rotorcraft, or powered-lift rating, who has satisfactorily completed an approved private pilot course conducted by a training center certificated under part 142 of this chapter, need only have a total of 35 hours of aeronautical experience to meet the requirements of this section.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.109
  § 61.109 Aeronautical experience
  (l) Permitted credit for flight training received from a flight instructor with a sport pilot rating. The holder of a sport pilot certificate may credit flight training received from a flight instructor with a sport pilot rating toward the aeronautical experience requirements of this section if the following conditions are met: (1) The flight training was accomplished in the same category and class of aircraft for which the rating is sought; (2) The flight instructor with a sport pilot rating was authorized to provide the flight training; and (3) The flight training included either—
  (i) Training on areas of operation that are required for both a sport pilot certificate and a private pilot certificate; or
  (ii) For airplanes with a V greater than 87 knots CAS, training on the control and maneuvering of an airplane solely by reference to the flight instruments, including straight and level flight, turns, descents, climbs, use of radio aids, and ATC directives, provided the training was received from a flight instructor with a sport pilot rating who holds an endorsement required by § 61.412(c).

--- G-23 Can a student pilot carry a passenger?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.89(a)
expected key facts:
  - student pilots may not act as PIC carrying passengers

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.89
  § 61.89 General limitations
  (a) A student pilot may not act as pilot in command of an aircraft: (1) That is carrying a passenger; (2) That is carrying property for compensation or hire; (3) For compensation or hire; (4) In furtherance of a business; (5) On an international flight, except that a student pilot may make solo training flights from Haines, Gustavus, or Juneau, Alaska, to White Horse, Yukon, Canada, and return over the province of British Columbia; (6) With a flight or surface visibility of less than 3 statute miles during daylight hours or 5 statute miles at night; (7) When the flight cannot be made with visual reference to the surface; or (8) In a manner contrary to any limitations placed in the pilot’s logbook by an authorized instructor.
  (b) A student pilot may not act as a required pilot flight crewmember on any aircraft for which more than one pilot is required by the type certificate of the aircraft or regulations under which the flight is conducted, except when receiving flight training from an authorized instructor on board an airship, and no person other than a required flight crewmember is carried on the aircraft.
  (c) A student pilot seeking a sport pilot certificate must comply with the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section and may not act as pilot in command—(1) Of an aircraft other than a lightsport aircraft; (2) At night; (3) At an altitude of more than 10,000 feet MSL or 2,000 feet AGL, whichever is higher; (4) In Class B, C, and D airspace, at an airport located in Class B, C, or D airspace, and to, from, through, or on an airport having an operational control tower without having received the ground and flight training specified in § 61.94 and an endorsement from an authorized instructor; (5) Of a light-sport aircraft without having received the applicable ground training, flight training, and instructor endorsements specified in § 61.327 (a) and (b).
  (d) The holder of a student pilot certificate may act as pilot in command of an aircraft without holding a medical certificate issued under part 67 of this chapter provided the student pilot holds a valid U.S. driver’s license, meets the requirements of § 61.23(c)(3), and the operation is conducted consistent with the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section and the conditions of § 61.113(i). Where the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section conflict with § 61.113(i), a student pilot must comply with paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.

--- G-24 Can I split fuel costs with my passengers as a private pilot?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.113(c)
expected key facts:
  - private pilot may pay no less than pro rata share
  - allowed expenses include fuel, oil, airport expenditures, and rental fees

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.113
  § 61.113 Private pilot privileges and limitations: Pilot in command
  (a) Except as provided in paragraphs
  (b) through (h) of this section, no person who holds a private pilot certificate may act as pilot in command of an aircraft that is carrying passengers or property for compensation or hire; nor may that person, for compensation or hire, act as pilot in command of an aircraft.
  (b) A private pilot may, for compensation or hire, act as pilot in command of an aircraft in connection with any business or employment if: (1) The flight is only incidental to that business or employment; and (2) The aircraft does not carry passengers or property for compensation or hire.
  (c) A private pilot may not pay less than the pro rata share of the operating expenses of a flight with passengers, provided the expenses involve only fuel, oil, airport expenditures, or rental fees.
  (d) A private pilot may act as pilot in command of a charitable, nonprofit, or community event flight described in § 91.146, if the sponsor and pilot comply with the requirements of § 91.146.
  (e) A private pilot may be reimbursed for aircraft operating expenses that are directly related to search and location operations, provided the expenses involve only fuel, oil, airport expenditures, or rental fees, and the operation is sanctioned and under the direction and control of: (1) A local, State, or Federal agency; or (2) An organization that conducts search and location operations.
  (f) A private pilot who is an aircraft salesman and who has at least 200 hours of logged flight time may demonstrate an aircraft in flight to a prospective buyer.
  (g) A private pilot who meets the requirements of § 61.69 may act as a pilot in command of an aircraft towing a glider or unpowered ultralight vehicle.
  (h) A private pilot may act as pilot in command for the purpose of conducting a production flight test in a light-sport aircraft intended for certification in the light-sport category under § 21.190 of this chapter, provided that—(1) The aircraft is a powered parachute or a weight-shift-control aircraft; (2) The person has at least 100 hours of pilot-in-command time in the category and class of aircraft flown; and (3) The person is familiar with the processes and procedures applicable to the conduct of production flight testing, to include operations conducted under a special flight permit and any associated operating limitations.
  (i) A private pilot may act as pilot in command or serve as a required flightcrew member of an aircraft without holding a medical certificate issued under part 67 of this chapter provided the pilot holds a valid U.S. driver’s license, meets the requirements of § 61.23(c)(3), and complies with this section and all of the following conditions and limitations: (1) The aircraft is authorized to carry not more than 6 occupants, has a maximum takeoff weight of not more than 6,000 pounds, and is operated with no more than five passengers on board; and (2) The flight, including each portion of the flight, is not carried out—
  (i) At an altitude that is more than 18,000 feet above mean sea level;
  (ii) Outside the United States unless authorized by the country in which the flight is conducted; or (iii) At an indicated airspeed exceeding 250 knots; and (3) The pilot has available in his or her logbook—
  (i) The completed medical examination checklist required under § 68.7 of this chapter; and
  (ii) The certificate of course completion required under § 61.23(c)(3).

--- G-25 When do I need a high-performance endorsement?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.31(f)
expected key facts:
  - required to act as PIC
  - airplane with an engine of more than 200 horsepower

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (a) Type ratings required. A person who acts as a pilot in command of any of the following aircraft must hold a type rating for that aircraft: (1) Large aircraft (except lighterthan-air). (2) Turbojet-powered airplanes. (3) Other aircraft specified by the Administrator through aircraft type certificate procedures.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (b) Authorization in lieu of a type rating. A person may be authorized to operate without a type rating for up to 60 days an aircraft requiring a type rating, provided—(1) The Administrator has authorized the flight or series of flights; (2) The Administrator has determined that an equivalent level of safety can be achieved through the operating limitations on the authorization; (3) The person shows that compliance with paragraph (a) of this section is impracticable for the flight or series of flights; and (4) The flight—
  (i) Involves only a ferry flight, training flight, test flight, or practical test for a pilot certificate or rating;
  (ii) Is within the United States; (iii) Does not involve operations for compensation or hire unless the compensation or hire involves payment for the use of the aircraft for training or taking a practical test; and
  (iv) Involves only the carriage of flight crewmembers considered essential for the flight. (5) If the flight or series of flights cannot be accomplished within the time limit of the authorization, the Administrator may authorize an additional period of up to 60 days to accomplish the flight or series of flights.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (c) Aircraft category, class, and type ratings: Limitations on the carriage of persons, or operating for compensation or hire. Unless a person holds a category, class, and type rating (if a class and type rating is required) that applies to the aircraft, that person may not act as pilot in command of an aircraft that is carrying another person, or is operated for compensation or hire. That person also may not act as pilot in command of that aircraft for compensation or hire.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (d) Aircraft category, class, and type ratings: Limitations on operating an aircraft as the pilot in command. To serve as the pilot in command of an aircraft, a person must—(1) Hold the appropriate category, class, and type rating (if a class or type rating is required) for the aircraft to be flown; or (2) Have received training required by this part that is appropriate to the pilot certification level, aircraft category, class, and type rating (if a class or type rating is required) for the aircraft to be flown, and have received an endorsement for solo flight in that aircraft from an authorized instructor.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (e) Additional training required for operating complex airplanes. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) of this section, no person may act as pilot in command of a complex airplane, unless the person has—
  (i) Received and logged ground and flight training from an authorized instructor in a complex airplane, or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of a complex airplane, and has been found proficient in the operation and systems of the airplane; and
  (ii) Received a one-time endorsement in the pilot’s logbook from an authorized instructor who certifies the person is proficient to operate a complex airplane. (2) The training and endorsement required by paragraph (e)(1) of this section is not required if—
  (i) The person has logged flight time as pilot in command of a complex airplane, or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of a complex airplane prior to August 4, 1997; or
  (ii) The person has received ground and flight training under an approved training program and has satisfactorily completed a competency check under § 135.293 of this chapter in a complex airplane, or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of a complex airplane which must be documented in the pilot’s logbook or training record.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (f) Additional training required for operating high-performance airplanes. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (f)(2) of this section, no person may act as pilot in command of a high-performance airplane (an airplane with an engine of more than 200 horsepower), unless the person has—
  (i) Received and logged ground and flight training from an authorized instructor in a high-performance airplane, or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of a high-performance airplane, and has been found proficient in the operation and systems of the airplane; and
  (ii) Received a one-time endorsement in the pilot’s logbook from an authorized instructor who certifies the person is proficient to operate a high-performance airplane. (2) The training and endorsement required by paragraph (f)(1) of this section is not required if—
  (i) The person has logged flight time as pilot in command of a high-performance airplane, or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of a high-performance airplane prior to August 4, 1997; or
  (ii) The person has received ground and flight training under an approved training program and has satisfactorily completed a competency check under § 135.293 of this chapter in a high performance airplane, or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of a high performance airplane which must be documented in the pilot’s logbook or training record.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (g) Additional training required for operating pressurized aircraft capable of operating at high altitudes. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (g)(3) of this section, no person may act as pilot in command of a pressurized aircraft (an aircraft that has a service ceiling or maximum operating altitude, whichever is lower, above 25,000 feet MSL), unless that person has received and logged ground training from an authorized instructor and obtained an endorsement in the person’s logbook or training record from an authorized instructor who certifies the person has satisfactorily accomplished the ground training. The ground training must include at least the following subjects:
  (i) High-altitude aerodynamics and meteorology;
  (ii) Respiration; (iii) Effects, symptoms, and causes of hypoxia and any other high-altitude sickness;
  (iv) Duration of consciousness without supplemental oxygen;
  (v) Effects of prolonged usage of supplemental oxygen;
  (vi) Causes and effects of gas expansion and gas bubble formation; (vii) Preventive measures for eliminating gas expansion, gas bubble formation, and high-altitude sickness; (viii) Physical phenomena and incidents of decompression; and
  (ix) Any other physiological aspects of high-altitude flight. (2) Except as provided in paragraph (g)(3) of this section, no person may act as pilot in command of a pressurized aircraft unless that person has received and logged training from an authorized instructor in a pressurized aircraft, or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of a pressurized aircraft, and obtained an endorsement in the person’s logbook or training record from an authorized instructor who found the person proficient in the operation of a pressurized aircraft. The flight training must include at least the following subjects:
  (i) Normal cruise flight operations while operating above 25,000 feet MSL;
  (ii) Proper emergency procedures for simulated rapid decompression without actually depressurizing the aircraft; and (iii) Emergency descent procedures. (3) The training and endorsement required by paragraphs (g)(1) and (g)(2) of this section are not required if that person can document satisfactory accomplishment of any of the following in a pressurized aircraft, or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of a pressurized aircraft:
  (i) Serving as pilot in command before April 15, 1991;
  (ii) Completing a pilot proficiency check for a pilot certificate or rating before April 15, 1991; (iii) Completing an official pilot-incommand check conducted by the military services of the United States; or
  (iv) Completing a pilot-in-command proficiency check under part 121, 125, or 135 of this chapter conducted by the Administrator or by an approved pilot check airman.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (h) Additional aircraft type-specific training. No person may serve as pilot in command of an aircraft that the Administrator has determined requires aircraft type-specific training unless that person has—(1) Received and logged type-specific training in the aircraft, or in a full flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of that type of aircraft; and (2) Received a logbook endorsement from an authorized instructor who has found the person proficient in the operation of the aircraft and its systems.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (i) Additional training required for operating tailwheel airplanes. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (i)(2) of this section, no person may act as pilot in command of a tailwheel airplane unless that person has received and logged flight training from an authorized instructor in a tailwheel airplane and received an endorsement in the person’s logbook from an authorized instructor who found the person proficient in the operation of a tailwheel airplane. The flight training must include at least the following maneuvers and procedures:
  (i) Normal and crosswind takeoffs and landings;
  (ii) Wheel landings (unless the manufacturer has recommended against such landings); and (iii) Go-around procedures. (2) The training and endorsement required by paragraph (i)(1) of this section is not required if the person logged pilot-in-command time in a tailwheel airplane before April 15, 1991.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (j) Additional training required for operating a glider. (1) No person may act as pilot in command of a glider—
  (i) Using ground-tow procedures, unless that person has satisfactorily accomplished ground and flight training on ground-tow procedures and operations, and has received an endorsement from an authorized instructor who certifies in that pilot’s logbook that the pilot has been found proficient in ground-tow procedures and operations;
  (ii) Using aerotow procedures, unless that person has satisfactorily accomplished ground and flight training on aerotow procedures and operations, and has received an endorsement from an authorized instructor who certifies in that pilot’s logbook that the pilot has been found proficient in aerotow procedures and operations; or (iii) Using self-launch procedures, unless that person has satisfactorily accomplished ground and flight training on self-launch procedures and operations, and has received an endorsement from an authorized instructor who certifies in that pilot’s logbook that the pilot has been found proficient in self-launch procedures and operations. (2) The holder of a glider rating issued prior to August 4, 1997, is considered to be in compliance with the training and logbook endorsement requirements of this paragraph for the specific operating privilege for which the holder is already qualified.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (k) Additional training required for night vision goggle operations. (1) Except as provided under paragraph (k)(3) of this section, a person may act as pilot in command of an aircraft using night vision goggles only if that person receives and logs ground training from an authorized instructor and obtains a logbook or training record endorsement from an authorized instructor who certifies the person completed the ground training. The ground training must include the following subjects:
  (i) Applicable portions of this chapter that relate to night vision goggle limitations and flight operations;
  (ii) Aeromedical factors related to the use of night vision goggles, including how to protect night vision, how the eyes adapt to night, self-imposed stresses that affect night vision, effects of lighting on night vision, cues used to estimate distance and depth perception at night, and visual illusions; (iii) Normal, abnormal, and emergency operations of night vision goggle equipment;
  (iv) Night vision goggle performance and scene interpretation; and
  (v) Night vision goggle operation flight planning, including night terrain interpretation and factors affecting terrain interpretation. (2) Except as provided under paragraph (k)(3) of this section, a person may act as pilot in command of an aircraft using night vision goggles only if that person receives and logs flight training from an authorized instructor and obtains a logbook or training record endorsement from an authorized instructor who found the person proficient in the use of night vision goggles. The flight training must include the following tasks:
  (i) Preflight and use of internal and external aircraft lighting systems for night vision goggle operations;
  (ii) Preflight preparation of night vision goggles for night vision goggle operations; (iii) Proper piloting techniques when using night vision goggles during the takeoff, climb, enroute, descent, and landing phases of flight; and
  (iv) Normal, abnormal, and emergency flight operations using night vision goggles. (3) The requirements under paragraphs (k)(1) and (2) of this section do not apply if a person can document satisfactory completion of any of the following pilot proficiency checks using night vision goggles in an aircraft:
  (i) A pilot proficiency check on night vision goggle operations conducted by the U.S. Armed Forces.
  (ii) A pilot proficiency check on night vision goggle operations under part 135 of this chapter conducted by an Examiner or Check Airman. (iii) A pilot proficiency check on night vision goggle operations conducted by a night vision goggle manufacturer or authorized instructor, when the pilot—(A) Is employed by a Federal, State, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; and (B) Has logged at least 20 hours as pilot in command in night vision goggle operations.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.31
  § 61.31 Type rating requirements, additional training, and authorization requirements
  (l) Exceptions. (1) This section does not require a category and class rating for aircraft not type-certificated as airplanes, rotorcraft, gliders, lighterthan-air aircraft, powered-lifts, powered parachutes, or weight-shift-control aircraft. (2) The rating limitations of this section do not apply to—
  (i) An applicant when taking a practical test given by an examiner;
  (ii) The holder of a student pilot certificate; (iii) The holder of a pilot certificate when operating an aircraft under the authority of—(A) A provisional type certificate; or (B) An experimental certificate, unless the operation involves carrying a passenger;
  (iv) The holder of a pilot certificate with a lighter-than-air category rating when operating a balloon;
  (v) The holder of a recreational pilot certificate operating under the provisions of § 61.101(h); or
  (vi) The holder of a sport pilot certificate when operating a light-sport aircraft.

--- G-26 How old do I have to be to get a private pilot certificate?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.103
expected key facts:
  - 17 years old
  - 16 years old for glider or balloon
  - read, speak, write, and understand English

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.103
  § 61.103 Eligibility requirements: General
  To be eligible for a private pilot certificate, a person must:
  (a) Be at least 17 years of age for a rating in other than a glider or balloon.
  (b) Be at least 16 years of age for a rating in a glider or balloon.
  (c) Be able to read, speak, write, and understand the English language. If the applicant is unable to meet one of these requirements due to medical reasons, then the Administrator may place such operating limitations on that applicant’s pilot certificate as are necessary for the safe operation of the aircraft.
  (d) Receive a logbook endorsement from an authorized instructor who: (1) Conducted the training or reviewed the person’s home study on the aeronautical knowledge areas listed in § 61.105(b) of this part that apply to the aircraft rating sought; and (2) Certified that the person is prepared for the required knowledge test.
  (e) Pass the required knowledge test on the aeronautical knowledge areas listed in § 61.105(b) of this part.
  (f) Receive flight training and a logbook endorsement from an authorized instructor who: (1) Conducted the training in the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b) of this part that apply to the aircraft rating sought; and (2) Certified that the person is prepared for the required practical test.
  (g) Meet the aeronautical experience requirements of this part that apply to the aircraft rating sought before applying for the practical test.
  (h) Pass a practical test on the areas of operation listed in § 61.107(b) of this part that apply to the aircraft rating sought.
  (i) Comply with the appropriate sections of this part that apply to the aircraft category and class rating sought.
  (j) Hold a U.S. student pilot certificate, sport pilot certificate, or recreational pilot certificate.

--- G-27 Can I log PIC time while flying with an instructor?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.51(e)
expected key facts:
  - sole manipulator of the controls
  - aircraft for which the pilot is rated

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (a) Training time and aeronautical experience. Each person must document and record the following time in a manner acceptable to the Administrator: (1) Training and aeronautical experience used to meet the requirements for a certificate, rating, or flight review of this part. (2) The aeronautical experience required for meeting the recent flight experience requirements of this part.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (b) Logbook entries. For the purposes of meeting the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, each person must enter the following information for each flight or lesson logged: (1) General—
  (i) Date.
  (ii) Total flight time or lesson time. (iii) Location where the aircraft departed and arrived, or for lessons in a full flight simulator or flight training device, the location where the lesson occurred.
  (iv) Type and identification of aircraft, full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device, as appropriate.
  (v) The name of a safety pilot, if required by § 91.109 of this chapter. (2) Type of pilot experience or training—
  (i) Solo.
  (ii) Pilot in command. (iii) Second in command.
  (iv) Flight and ground training received from an authorized instructor.
  (v) Training received in a full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device from an authorized instructor. (3) Conditions of flight—
  (i) Day or night.
  (ii) Actual instrument. (iii) Simulated instrument conditions in flight, a full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device.
  (iv) Use of night vision goggles in an aircraft in flight, in a full flight simulator, or in a flight training device.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (c) Logging of pilot time. The pilot time described in this section may be used to: (1) Apply for a certificate or rating issued under this part or a privilege authorized under this part; or (2) Satisfy the recent flight experience requirements of this part.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (d) Logging of solo flight time. Except for a student pilot performing the duties of pilot in command of an airship requiring more than one pilot flight crewmember, a pilot may log as solo flight time only that flight time when the pilot is the sole occupant of the aircraft.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (e) Logging pilot-in-command flight time. (1) A sport, recreational, private, commercial, or airline transport pilot may log pilot in command flight time for flights-
  (i) Except when logging flight time under § 61.159(c), when the pilot is the sole manipulator of the controls of an aircraft for which the pilot is rated, or has sport pilot privileges for that category and class of aircraft, if the aircraft class rating is appropriate;
  (ii) When the pilot is the sole occupant in the aircraft; (iii) When the pilot, except for a holder of a sport or recreational pilot certificate, acts as pilot in command of an aircraft for which more than one pilot is required under the type certification of the aircraft or the regulations under which the flight is conducted; or
  (iv) When the pilot performs the duties of pilot in command while under the supervision of a qualified pilot in command provided—(A) The pilot performing the duties of pilot in command holds a commercial or airline transport pilot certificate and aircraft rating that is appropriate to the category and class of aircraft being flown, if a class rating is appropriate; (B) The pilot performing the duties of pilot in command is undergoing an approved pilot in command training program that includes ground and flight training on the following areas of operation—( 1 ) Preflight preparation; ( 2 ) Preflight procedures; ( 3 ) Takeoff and departure; ( 4 ) In-flight maneuvers; ( 5 ) Instrument procedures; ( 6 ) Landings and approaches to landings; ( 7 ) Normal and abnormal procedures; ( 8 ) Emergency procedures; and ( 9 ) Postflight procedures; (C) The supervising pilot in command holds—( 1 ) A commercial pilot certificate and flight instructor certificate, and aircraft rating that is appropriate to the category, class, and type of aircraft being flown, if a class or type rating is required; or ( 2 ) An airline transport pilot certificate and aircraft rating that is appropriate to the category, class, and type of aircraft being flown, if a class or type rating is required; and (D) The supervising pilot in command logs the pilot in command training in the pilot’s logbook, certifies the pilot in command training in the pilot’s logbook and attests to that certification with his or her signature, and flight instructor certificate number. (2) If rated to act as pilot in command of the aircraft, an airline transport pilot may log all flight time while acting as pilot in command of an operation requiring an airline transport pilot certificate. (3) A certificated flight instructor may log pilot in command flight time for all flight time while serving as the authorized instructor in an operation if the instructor is rated to act as pilot in command of that aircraft. (4) A student pilot may log pilot-incommand time only when the student pilot—
  (i) Is the sole occupant of the aircraft or is performing the duties of pilot of command of an airship requiring more than one pilot flight crewmember;
  (ii) Has a solo flight endorsement as required under § 61.87 of this part; and (iii) Is undergoing training for a pilot certificate or rating. (5) A commercial pilot or airline transport pilot may log all flight time while acting as pilot in command of an operation in accordance with § 135.99(c) of this chapter if the flight is conducted in accordance with an approved second-in-command professional development program that meets the requirements of § 135.99(c) of this chapter.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (f) Logging second-in-command flight time. A person may log second-in-command time only for that flight time during which that person: (1) Is qualified in accordance with the second-in-command requirements of § 61.55, and occupies a crewmember station in an aircraft that requires more than one pilot by the aircraft’s type certificate; (2) Holds the appropriate category, class, and instrument rating (if an instrument rating is required for the flight) for the aircraft being flown, and more than one pilot is required under the type certification of the aircraft or the regulations under which the flight is being conducted; or (3) Serves as second in command in operations conducted in accordance with § 135.99(c) of this chapter when a second pilot is not required under the type certification of the aircraft or the regulations under which the flight is being conducted, provided the requirements in § 61.159(c) are satisfied.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (g) Logging instrument time. (1) A person may log instrument time only for that flight time when the person operates the aircraft solely by reference to instruments under actual or simulated instrument flight conditions. (2) An authorized instructor may log instrument time when conducting instrument flight instruction in actual instrument flight conditions. (3) For the purposes of logging instrument time to meet the recent instrument experience requirements of § 61.57(c) of this part, the following information must be recorded in the person’s logbook—
  (i) The location and type of each instrument approach accomplished; and
  (ii) The name of the safety pilot, if required. (4) A person may use time in a full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device for acquiring instrument aeronautical experience for a pilot certificate or rating provided an authorized instructor is present to observe that time and signs the person’s logbook or training record to verify the time and the content of the training session. (5) A person may use time in a full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device for satisfying instrument recency experience requirements provided a logbook or training record is maintained to specify the training device, time, and the content.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (h) Logging training time. (1) A person may log training time when that person receives training from an authorized instructor in an aircraft, full flight simulator, flight training device, or aviation training device. (2) The training time must be logged in a logbook and must:

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (i) Be endorsed in a legible manner by the authorized instructor; and
  (ii) Include a description of the training given, the length of the training lesson, and the authorized instructor’s signature, certificate number, and certificate expiration date.
  (i) Presentation of required documents. (1) Persons must present their pilot certificate, medical certificate, logbook, or any other record required by this part for inspection upon a reasonable request by—
  (i) The Administrator; (ii) An authorized representative from the National Transportation Safety Board; or (iii) Any Federal, State, or local law enforcement officer. (2) A student pilot must carry the following items in the aircraft on all solo cross-country flights as evidence of the required authorized instructor clearances and endorsements—
  (i) Pilot logbook;
  (ii) Student pilot certificate; and (iii) Any other record required by this section. (3) A sport pilot must carry his or her logbook or other evidence of required authorized instructor endorsements on all flights. (4) A recreational pilot must carry his or her logbook with the required authorized instructor endorsements on all solo flights—
  (i) That exceed 50 nautical miles from the airport at which training was received;
  (ii) Within airspace that requires communication with air traffic control; (iii) Conducted between sunset and sunrise; or
  (iv) In an aircraft for which the pilot does not hold an appropriate category or class rating. (5) A flight instructor with a sport pilot rating must carry his or her logbook or other evidence of required authorized instructor endorsements on all flights when providing flight training.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (j) Aircraft requirements for logging flight time. For a person to log flight time, the time must be acquired in an aircraft that is identified as an aircraft under § 61.5(b), and is—(1) An aircraft of U.S. registry with either a standard or special airworthiness certificate; (2) An aircraft of foreign registry with an airworthiness certificate that is approved by the aviation authority of a foreign country that is a Member State to the Convention on International Civil Aviation Organization; (3) A military aircraft under the direct operational control of the U.S. Armed Forces; or (4) A public aircraft under the direct operational control of a Federal, State, county, or municipal law enforcement agency, if the flight time was acquired by the pilot while engaged on an official law enforcement flight for a Federal, State, County, or Municipal law enforcement agency.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.51
  § 61.51 Pilot logbooks
  (k) Logging night vision goggle time. (1) A person may log night vision goggle time only for the time the person uses night vision goggles as the primary visual reference of the surface and operates:
  (i) An aircraft during a night vision goggle operation; or
  (ii) A full flight simulator or flight training device with the lighting system adjusted to represent the period beginning 1 hour after sunset and ending 1 hour before sunrise. (2) An authorized instructor may log night vision goggle time when that person conducts training using night vision goggles as the primary visual reference of the surface and operates:
  (i) An aircraft during a night goggle operation; or
  (ii) A full flight simulator or flight training device with the lighting system adjusted to represent the period beginning 1 hour after sunset and ending 1 hour before sunrise. (3) To log night vision goggle time to meet the recent night vision goggle experience requirements under § 61.57(f), a person must log the information required under § 61.51(b).

--- G-28 What endorsements does a student pilot need for a solo cross-country?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 61.93
expected key facts:
  - solo cross-country endorsement from an authorized instructor
  - training endorsement
  - instructor review of preflight planning for each flight

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (a) General. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, a student pilot must meet the requirements of this section before—
  (i) Conducting a solo cross-country flight, or any flight greater than 25 nautical miles from the airport from where the flight originated.
  (ii) Making a solo flight and landing at any location other than the airport of origination. (2) Except as provided in paragraph

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (b) of this section, a student pilot who seeks solo cross-country flight privileges must:
  (i) Have received flight training from an instructor authorized to provide flight training on the maneuvers and procedures of this section that are appropriate to the make and model of aircraft for which solo cross-country privileges are sought;
  (ii) Have demonstrated cross-country proficiency on the appropriate maneuvers and procedures of this section to an authorized instructor; (iii) Have satisfactorily accomplished the pre-solo flight maneuvers and procedures required by § 61.87 of this part in the make and model of aircraft or similar make and model of aircraft for which solo cross-country privileges are sought; and
  (iv) Comply with any limitations included in the authorized instructor’s endorsement that are required by paragraph (c) of this section. (3) A student pilot who seeks solo cross-country flight privileges must have received ground and flight training from an authorized instructor on the cross-country maneuvers and procedures listed in this section that are appropriate to the aircraft to be flown.
  (b) Authorization to perform certain solo flights and cross-country flights. A student pilot must obtain an endorsement from an authorized instructor to make solo flights from the airport where the student pilot normally receives training to another location. A student pilot who receives this endorsement must comply with the requirements of this paragraph. (1) Solo flights may be made to another airport that is within 25 nautical miles from the airport where the student pilot normally receives training, provided—
  (i) An authorized instructor has given the student pilot flight training at the other airport, and that training includes flight in both directions over the route, entering and exiting the traffic pattern, and takeoffs and landings at the other airport;
  (ii) The authorized instructor who gave the training endorses the student pilot’s logbook authorizing the flight; (iii) The student pilot has a solo flight endorsement in accordance with § 61.87 of this part;
  (iv) The authorized instructor has determined that the student pilot is proficient to make the flight; and
  (v) The purpose of the flight is to practice takeoffs and landings at that other airport. (2) Repeated specific solo cross-country flights may be made to another airport that is within 50 nautical miles of the airport from which the flight originated, provided—
  (i) The authorized instructor has given the student flight training in both directions over the route, including entering and exiting the traffic patterns, takeoffs, and landings at the airports to be used;
  (ii) The authorized instructor who gave the training has endorsed the student’s logbook certifying that the student is proficient to make such flights; (iii) The student has a solo flight endorsement in accordance with § 61.87 of this part; and
  (iv) The student has a solo cross country flight endorsement in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section; however, for repeated solo cross country flights to another airport within 50 nautical miles from which the flight originated, separate endorsements are not required to be made for each flight.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (c) Endorsements for solo cross-country flights. Except as specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, a student pilot must have the endorsements prescribed in this paragraph for each cross-country flight: (1) A student pilot must have a solo cross-country endorsement from the authorized instructor who conducted the training that is placed in that person’s logbook for the specific category of aircraft to be flown. (2) A student pilot must have a solo cross-country endorsement from an authorized instructor that is placed in that person’s logbook for the specific make and model of aircraft to be flown. (3) For each cross-country flight, the authorized instructor who reviews the cross-country planning must make an endorsement in the person’s logbook after reviewing that person’s crosscountry planning, as specified in paragraph (d) of this section. The endorsement must—
  (i) Specify the make and model of aircraft to be flown;
  (ii) State that the student’s preflight planning and preparation is correct and that the student is prepared to make the flight safely under the known conditions; and (iii) State that any limitations required by the student’s authorized instructor are met.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (d) Limitations on authorized instructors to permit solo cross-country flights. An authorized instructor may not permit a student pilot to conduct a solo cross-country flight unless that instructor has: (1) Determined that the student’s cross-country planning is correct for the flight; (2) Reviewed the current and forecast weather conditions and has determined that the flight can be completed under VFR; (3) Determined that the student is proficient to conduct the flight safely; (4) Determined that the student has the appropriate solo cross-country endorsement for the make and model of aircraft to be flown; and (5) Determined that the student’s solo flight endorsement is current for the make and model aircraft to be flown.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (e) Maneuvers and procedures for crosscountry flight training in a single-engine airplane. A student pilot who is receiving training for cross-country flight in a single-engine airplane must receive and log flight training in the following maneuvers and procedures: (1) Use of aeronautical charts for VFR navigation using pilotage and dead reckoning with the aid of a magnetic compass; (2) Use of aircraft performance charts pertaining to cross-country flight; (3) Procurement and analysis of aeronautical weather reports and forecasts, including recognition of critical weather situations and estimating visibility while in flight; (4) Emergency procedures; (5) Traffic pattern procedures that include area departure, area arrival, entry into the traffic pattern, and approach; (6) Procedures and operating practices for collision avoidance, wake turbulence precautions, and windshear avoidance; (7) Recognition, avoidance, and operational restrictions of hazardous terrain features in the geographical area where the cross-country flight will be flown; (8) Procedures for operating the instruments and equipment installed in the aircraft to be flown, including recognition and use of the proper operational procedures and indications; (9) Use of radios for VFR navigation and two-way communication, except that a student pilot seeking a sport pilot certificate must only receive and log flight training on the use of radios installed in the aircraft to be flown; (10) Takeoff, approach, and landing procedures, including short-field, softfield, and crosswind takeoffs, approaches, and landings; (11) Climbs at best angle and best rate; and (12) Control and maneuvering solely by reference to flight instruments, including straight and level flight, turns, descents, climbs, use of radio aids, and ATC directives. For student pilots seeking a sport pilot certificate, the provisions of this paragraph only apply when receiving training for cross-country flight in an airplane that has a V greater than 87 knots CAS.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (f) Maneuvers and procedures for crosscountry flight training in a multiengine airplane. A student pilot who is receiving training for cross-country flight in a multiengine airplane must receive and log flight training in the following maneuvers and procedures: (1) Use of aeronautical charts for VFR navigation using pilotage and dead reckoning with the aid of a magnetic compass; (2) Use of aircraft performance charts pertaining to cross-country flight; (3) Procurement and analysis of aeronautical weather reports and forecasts, including recognition of critical weather situations and estimating visibility while in flight; (4) Emergency procedures; (5) Traffic pattern procedures that include area departure, area arrival, entry into the traffic pattern, and approach; (6) Procedures and operating practices for collision avoidance, wake turbulence precautions, and windshear avoidance; (7) Recognition, avoidance, and operational restrictions of hazardous terrain features in the geographical area where the cross-country flight will be flown; (8) Procedures for operating the instruments and equipment installed in the aircraft to be flown, including recognition and use of the proper operational procedures and indications; (9) Use of radios for VFR navigation and two-way communications; (10) Takeoff, approach, and landing procedures, including short-field, softfield, and crosswind takeoffs, approaches, and landings; (11) Climbs at best angle and best rate; and (12) Control and maneuvering solely by reference to flight instruments, including straight and level flight, turns, descents, climbs, use of radio aids, and ATC directives.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (g) Maneuvers and procedures for crosscountry flight training in a helicopter. A student pilot who is receiving training for cross-country flight in a helicopter must receive and log flight training for the following maneuvers and procedures: (1) Use of aeronautical charts for VFR navigation using pilotage and dead reckoning with the aid of a magnetic compass; (2) Use of aircraft performance charts pertaining to cross-country flight; (3) Procurement and analysis of aeronautical weather reports and forecasts, including recognition of critical weather situations and estimating visibility while in flight; (4) Emergency procedures; (5) Traffic pattern procedures that include area departure, area arrival, entry into the traffic pattern, and approach; (6) Procedures and operating practices for collision avoidance, wake turbulence precautions, and windshear avoidance; (7) Recognition, avoidance, and operational restrictions of hazardous terrain features in the geographical area where the cross-country flight will be flown; (8) Procedures for operating the instruments and equipment installed in the aircraft to be flown, including recognition and use of the proper operational procedures and indications; (9) Use of radios for VFR navigation and two-way communications; and (10) Takeoff, approach, and landing procedures.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (h) Maneuvers and procedures for crosscountry flight training in a gyroplane. A student pilot who is receiving training for cross-country flight in a gyroplane must receive and log flight training in the following maneuvers and procedures: (1) Use of aeronautical charts for VFR navigation using pilotage and dead reckoning with the aid of a magnetic compass; (2) Use of aircraft performance charts pertaining to cross-country flight; (3) Procurement and analysis of aeronautical weather reports and forecasts, including recognition of critical weather situations and estimating visibility while in flight; (4) Emergency procedures; (5) Traffic pattern procedures that include area departure, area arrival, entry into the traffic pattern, and approach; (6) Procedures and operating practices for collision avoidance, wake turbulence precautions, and windshear avoidance; (7) Recognition, avoidance, and operational restrictions of hazardous terrain features in the geographical area where the cross-country flight will be flown; (8) Procedures for operating the instruments and equipment installed in the aircraft to be flown, including recognition and use of the proper operational procedures and indications; (9) Use of radios for VFR navigation and two-way communication, except that a student pilot seeking a sport pilot certificate must only receive and log flight training on the use of radios installed in the aircraft to be flown; and (10) Takeoff, approach, and landing procedures, including short-field and soft-field takeoffs, approaches, and landings.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (i) Maneuvers and procedures for crosscountry flight training in a powered-lift. A student pilot who is receiving training for cross-country flight training in a powered-lift must receive and log flight training in the following maneuvers and procedures: (1) Use of aeronautical charts for VFR navigation using pilotage and dead reckoning with the aid of a magnetic compass; (2) Use of aircraft performance charts pertaining to cross-country flight; (3) Procurement and analysis of aeronautical weather reports and forecasts, including recognition of critical weather situations and estimating visibility while in flight; (4) Emergency procedures; (5) Traffic pattern procedures that include area departure, area arrival, entry into the traffic pattern, and approach; (6) Procedures and operating practices for collision avoidance, wake turbulence precautions, and windshear avoidance; (7) Recognition, avoidance, and operational restrictions of hazardous terrain features in the geographical area where the cross-country flight will be flown; (8) Procedures for operating the instruments and equipment installed in the aircraft to be flown, including recognition and use of the proper operational procedures and indications; (9) Use of radios for VFR navigation and two-way communications; (10) Takeoff, approach, and landing procedures that include high-altitude, steep, and shallow takeoffs, approaches, and landings; and (11) Control and maneuvering solely by reference to flight instruments, including straight and level flight, turns, descents, climbs, use of radio aids, and ATC directives.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (j) Maneuvers and procedures for crosscountry flight training in a glider. A student pilot who is receiving training for cross-country flight in a glider must receive and log flight training in the following maneuvers and procedures: (1) Use of aeronautical charts for VFR navigation using pilotage and dead reckoning with the aid of a magnetic compass; (2) Use of aircraft performance charts pertaining to cross-country flight; (3) Procurement and analysis of aeronautical weather reports and forecasts, including recognition of critical weather situations and estimating visibility while in flight; (4) Emergency procedures; (5) Traffic pattern procedures that include area departure, area arrival, entry into the traffic pattern, and approach; (6) Procedures and operating practices for collision avoidance, wake turbulence precautions, and windshear avoidance; (7) Recognition, avoidance, and operational restrictions of hazardous terrain features in the geographical area where the cross-country flight will be flown; (8) Procedures for operating the instruments and equipment installed in the aircraft to be flown, including recognition and use of the proper operational procedures and indications; (9) Landings accomplished without the use of the altimeter from at least 2,000 feet above the surface; and (10) Recognition of weather and upper air conditions favorable for cross-country soaring, ascending and descending flight, and altitude control.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (k) Maneuvers and procedures for crosscountry flight training in an airship. A student pilot who is receiving training for cross-country flight in an airship must receive and log flight training for the following maneuvers and procedures: (1) Use of aeronautical charts for VFR navigation using pilotage and dead reckoning with the aid of a magnetic compass; (2) Use of aircraft performance charts pertaining to cross-country flight; (3) Procurement and analysis of aeronautical weather reports and forecasts, including recognition of critical weather situations and estimating visibility while in flight; (4) Emergency procedures; (5) Traffic pattern procedures that include area departure, area arrival, entry into the traffic pattern, and approach; (6) Procedures and operating practices for collision avoidance, wake turbulence precautions, and windshear avoidance; (7) Recognition, avoidance, and operational restrictions of hazardous terrain features in the geographical area where the cross-country flight will be flown; (8) Procedures for operating the instruments and equipment installed in the aircraft to be flown, including recognition and use of the proper operational procedures and indications; (9) Use of radios for VFR navigation and two-way communication, except that a student pilot seeking a sport pilot certificate must only receive and log flight training on the use of radios installed in the aircraft to be flown; (10) Control of air pressure with regard to ascending and descending flight and altitude control; (11) Control of the airship solely by reference to flight instruments, except for a student pilot seeking a sport pilot certificate; and (12) Recognition of weather and upper air conditions conducive for the direction of cross-country flight.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (l) Maneuvers and procedures for crosscountry flight training in a powered parachute. A student pilot who is receiving training for cross-country flight in a powered parachute must receive and log flight training in the following maneuvers and procedures: (1) Use of aeronautical charts for VFR navigation using pilotage and dead reckoning with the aid of a magnetic compass, as appropriate. (2) Use of aircraft performance charts pertaining to cross-country flight. (3) Procurement and analysis of aeronautical weather reports and forecasts, including recognizing critical weather situations and estimating visibility while in flight. (4) Emergency procedures. (5) Traffic pattern procedures that include area departure, area arrival, entry into the traffic pattern, and approach. (6) Procedures and operating practices for collision avoidance, wake turbulence precautions, and windshear avoidance. (7) Recognition, avoidance, and operational restrictions of hazardous terrain features in the geographical area where the cross-country flight will be flown. (8) Procedures for operating the instruments and equipment installed in the aircraft to be flown, including recognition and use of the proper operational procedures and indications. (9) If equipped for flight with navigation radios, the use of radios for VFR navigation. (10) Recognition of weather and upper air conditions favorable for the crosscountry flight. (11) Takeoff, approach and landing procedures.

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 61 61.93
  § 61.93 Solo cross-country flight requirements
  (m) Maneuvers and procedures for cross-country flight training in a weightshift-control aircraft. A student pilot who is receiving training for crosscountry flight in a weight-shift-control aircraft must receive and log flight training for the following maneuvers and procedures: (1) Use of aeronautical charts for VFR navigation using pilotage and dead reckoning with the aid of a magnetic compass, as appropriate. (2) Use of aircraft performance charts pertaining to cross-country flight. (3) Procurement and analysis of aeronautical weather reports and forecasts, including recognizing critical weather situations and estimating visibility while in flight. (4) Emergency procedures. (5) Traffic pattern procedures that include area departure, area arrival, entry into the traffic pattern, and approach. (6) Procedures and operating practices for collision avoidance, wake turbulence precautions, and windshear avoidance. (7) Recognition, avoidance, and operational restrictions of hazardous terrain features in the geographical area where the cross-country flight will be flown. (8) Procedures for operating the instruments and equipment installed in the aircraft to be flown, including recognition and use of the proper operational procedures and indications. (9) If equipped for flight using navigation radios, the use of radios for VFR navigation. (10) Recognition of weather and upper air conditions favorable for the crosscountry flight. (11) Takeoff, approach and landing procedures, including crosswind approaches and landings.

--- G-29 What is the vision requirement for a third-class medical?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 67.303
expected key facts:
  - distant visual acuity of 20/40 or better
  - each eye separately
  - with or without correction

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 67 67.303
  § 67.303 Eye
  Eye standards for a third-class airman medical certificate are:
  (a) Distant visual acuity of 20/40 or better in each eye separately, with or without corrective lenses. If corrective lenses (spectacles or contact lenses) are necessary for 20/40 vision, the person may be eligible only on the condition that corrective lenses are worn while exercising the privileges of an airman certificate.
  (b) Near vision of 20/40 or better, Snellen equivalent, at 16 inches in each eye separately, with or without corrective lenses.
  (c) Ability to perceive those colors necessary for the safe performance of airman duties.
  (d) No acute or chronic pathological condition of either eye or adnexa that interferes with the proper function of an eye, that may reasonably be expected to progress to that degree, or that may reasonably be expected to be aggravated by flying.

--- G-30 What is the hearing standard for a third-class medical?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 67.305
expected key facts:
  - demonstrate hearing of an average conversational voice at 6 feet
  - or pass an audiometric test

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 67 67.305
  § 67.305 Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium
  Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium standards for a third-class airman medical certificate are:
  (a) The person shall demonstrate acceptable hearing by at least one of the following tests: (1) Demonstrate an ability to hear an average conversational voice in a quiet room, using both ears, at a distance of 6 feet from the examiner, with the back turned to the examiner. (2) Demonstrate an acceptable understanding of speech as determined by audiometric speech discrimination testing to a score of at least 70 percent obtained in one ear or in a sound field environment. (3) Provide acceptable results of pure tone audiometric testing of unaided hearing acuity according to the following table of worst acceptable thresholds, using the calibration standards of the American National Standards Institute, 1969:
  (b) No disease or condition of the middle or internal ear, nose, oral cavity, pharynx, or larynx that—(1) Interferes with, or is aggravated by, flying or may reasonably be expected to do so; or (2) Interferes with clear and effective speech communication.
  (c) No disease or condition manifested by, or that may reasonably be expected to be manifested by, vertigo or a disturbance of equilibrium.

--- G-31 Is substance dependence disqualifying for a medical certificate?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 67.307
expected key facts:
  - substance dependence is disqualifying
  - within the preceding 2 years
  - unless there is clinical evidence of recovery

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 67 67.307
  § 67.307 Mental
  Mental standards for a third-class airman medical certificate are:
  (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of any of the following: (1) A personality disorder that is severe enough to have repeatedly manifested itself by overt acts. (2) A psychosis. As used in this section, ‘‘psychosis’’ refers to a mental disorder in which—
  (i) The individual has manifested delusions, hallucinations, grossly bizarre or disorganized behavior, or other commonly accepted symptoms of this condition; or
  (ii) The individual may reasonably be expected to manifest delusions, hallucinations, grossly bizarre or disorganized behavior, or other commonly accepted symptoms of this condition. (3) A bipolar disorder. (4) Substance dependence, except where there is established clinical evidence, satisfactory to the Federal Air Surgeon, of recovery, including sustained total abstinence from the substance(s) for not less than the preceding 2 years. As used in this section—
  (i) ‘‘Substance’’ includes: alcohol; other sedatives and hypnotics; anxiolytics; opioids; central nervous system stimulants such as cocaine, amphetamines, and similarly acting sympathomimetics; hallucinogens; phencyclidine or similarly acting arylcyclohexylamines; cannabis; inhalants; and other psychoactive drugs and chemicals; and
  (ii) ‘‘Substance dependence’’ means a condition in which a person is dependent on a substance, other than tobacco or ordinary xanthine-containing (e.g., caffeine) beverages, as evidenced by—(A) Increased tolerance; (B) Manifestation of withdrawal symptoms; (C) Impaired control of use; or (D) Continued use despite damage to physical health or impairment of social, personal, or occupational functioning.
  (b) No substance abuse within the preceding 2 years defined as: (1) Use of a substance in a situation in which that use was physically hazardous, if there has been at any other time an instance of the use of a substance also in a situation in which that use was physically hazardous; (2) A verified positive drug test result, an alcohol test result of 0.04 or greater alcohol concentration, or a refusal to submit to a drug or alcohol test required by the U.S. Department of Transportation or an agency of the U.S. Department of Transportation; or (3) Misuse of a substance that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on case history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the substance involved, finds—
  (i) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; or
  (ii) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.
  (c) No other personality disorder, neurosis, or other mental condition that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on the case history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the condition involved, finds—(1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; or (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.

--- G-32 Will a past heart attack disqualify me from a third-class medical?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 67.311
expected key facts:
  - myocardial infarction is disqualifying under cardiovascular standards
  - special issuance may be possible

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 67 67.311
  § 67.311 Cardiovascular
  Cardiovascular standards for a thirdclass airman medical certificate are no established medical history or clinical diagnosis of any of the following:
  (a) Myocardial infarction;
  (b) Angina pectoris;
  (c) Coronary heart disease that has required treatment or, if untreated, that has been symptomatic or clinically significant;
  (d) Cardiac valve replacement;
  (e) Permanent cardiac pacemaker implantation; or
  (f) Heart replacement.

--- G-33 What altitudes does Class A airspace cover?
expected citation: 14 CFR § 71.33 (AIM 3-2-2)
expected key facts:
  - 18,000 ft MSL
  - up to and including FL600

resolved chunk: 14 CFR Part 71 71.33
  § 71.33 Class A airspace areas
  (a) That airspace of the United States, including that airspace overlying the waters within 12 nautical miles of the coast of the 48 contiguous States, from 18,000 feet MSL to and including FL600 excluding the states of Alaska and Hawaii.
  (b) That airspace of the State of Alaska, including that airspace overlying the waters within 12 nautical miles of the coast, from 18,000 feet MSL to and including FL600 but not including the airspace less than 1,500 feet above the surface of the earth and the Alaska Peninsula west of longitude 160 00 00 West.
  (c) The airspace areas listed as offshore airspace areas in subpart A of FAA Order JO 7400.11H (incorporated by reference, see § 71.1) that are designated in international airspace within areas of domestic radio navigational signal or ATC radar coverage, and within which domestic ATC procedures are applied.

resolved chunk: AIM 3-2-2
  AIM 3-2-2 Class A Airspace
  a. Definition. Generally, that airspace from 18,000 feet MSL up to and including FL 600, including the airspace overlying the waters within 12 nautical miles off the coast of the 48 contiguous States and Alaska; and designated international airspace beyond 12 nautical miles off the coast of the 48 contiguous States and Alaska within areas of domestic radio navigational signal or ATC radar coverage, and within which domestic procedures are applied.
  b. Operating Rules and Pilot/Equipment Requirements. Unless otherwise authorized, all persons must operate their aircraft under IFR. (See 14 CFR Section 71.33, Sections 91.167 through 91.193, Sections 91.215 through 91.217, and Sections 91.225 through 91.227.)
  c. Charts. Class A airspace is not specifically charted.

--- G-34 What class of airspace is a Victor airway and how wide is it?
expected citation: AIM 3-2-6
expected key facts:
  - Federal airways are Class E airspace
  - extend 4 NM each side of centerline
  - from 1,200 ft AGL
  - up to but not including 18,000 ft MSL

resolved chunk: AIM 3-2-6
  AIM 3-2-6 Class E Airspace
  a. Definition. Class E airspace is controlled airspace that is designated to serve a variety of terminal or en route purposes as described in this paragraph.

resolved chunk: AIM 3-2-6
  AIM 3-2-6 Class E Airspace
  b. Operating Rules and Pilot/Equipment Requirements:
  1. Pilot Certification. No specific certification required.
  2. Equipment. Unless otherwise authorized by ATC: (a) An operable radar beacon transponder with automatic altitude reporting capability and operable ADS−B Out equipment are required at and above 10,000 feet MSL within the 48 contiguous states and the District of Columbia, excluding the airspace at and below 2,500 feet above the surface, and (b) Operable ADS−B Out equipment at and above 3,000 feet MSL over the Gulf of Mexico from the coastline of the United States out to 12 nautical miles.
  NOTE− The airspace described in (b) is specified in 14 CFR § 91.225 for ADS−B Out requirements. However, 14 CFR § 91.215 does not include this airspace for transponder requirements.
  3. Arrival or Through Flight Entry Requirements. No specific requirements.

resolved chunk: AIM 3-2-6
  AIM 3-2-6 Class E Airspace
  c. Charts. Class E airspace below 14,500 feet MSL is charted on Sectional, Terminal, and IFR Enroute Low Altitude charts.

resolved chunk: AIM 3-2-6
  AIM 3-2-6 Class E Airspace
  d. Vertical limits. Except where designated at a lower altitude (see paragraph 3−2−6e, below, for specifics), Class E airspace in the United States consists of:
  1. The airspace extending upward from 14,500 feet MSL to, but not including, 18,000 feet MSL overlying the 48 contiguous states, the District of Columbia and Alaska, including the waters within nautical 12 miles from the coast of the 48 contiguous states and Alaska; excluding: (a) The Alaska peninsula west of longitude 160  00 ' 00 '' W.; and (b) The airspace below 1,500 feet above the surface of the earth unless specifically designated lower (for example, in mountainous terrain higher than 13,000 feet MSL).
  2. The airspace above FL 600 is Class E airspace.

resolved chunk: AIM 3-2-6
  AIM 3-2-6 Class E Airspace
  e. Functions of Class E Airspace. Class E airspace may be designated for the following purposes:
  1. Surface area designated for an airport where a control tower is not in operation. Class E surface areas extend upward from the surface to a designated altitude, or to the adjacent or overlying controlled airspace. The airspace will be configured to contain all instrument procedures. (a) To qualify for a Class E surface area, the airport must have weather observation and reporting capability, and communications capability must exist with aircraft down to the runway surface. (b) A Class E surface area may also be designated to accommodate part-time operations at a Class C or Class D airspace location (for example, those periods when the control tower is not in operation). (c) Pilots should refer to the airport page in the applicable Chart Supplement for surface area status information.
  2. Extension to a surface area. Class E airspace may be designated as extensions to Class B, Class C, Class D, and Class E surface areas. Class E airspace extensions begin at the surface and extend up to the overlying controlled airspace. The extensions provide controlled airspace to contain standard instrument approach procedures without imposing a communications requirement on pilots operating under VFR. Surface area arrival extensions become part of the surface area and are in effect during the same times as the surface area.
  NOTE− When a Class C or Class D surface area is not in effect continuously (for example, where a control tower only operates part-time), the surface area airspace will change to either a Class E surface area or Class G airspace. In such cases, the “Airspace” entry for the airport in the Chart Supplement will state “other times Class E” or “other times Class G.” When a part-time surface area changes to Class E airspace, the Class E arrival extensions will remain in effect as Class E airspace. If a part–time Class C, Class D, or Class E surface area becomes Class G airspace, the arrival extensions will change to Class G at the same time.
  3. Airspace used for transition. Class E airspace areas may be designated for transitioning aircraft to/from the terminal or en route environment. (a) Class E transition areas extend upward from either 700 feet AGL (shown as magenta vignette on sectional charts) or 1,200 feet AGL (blue vignette) and are designated for airports with an approved instrument procedure. (b) The 700-foot/1200-foot AGL Class E airspace transition areas remain in effect continuously, regardless of airport operating hours or surface area status.
  NOTE− Do not confuse the 700-foot and 1200-foot Class E transition areas with surface areas or surface area extensions.
  4. En Route Domestic Areas. There are Class E airspace areas that extend upward from a specified altitude and are en route domestic airspace areas that provide controlled airspace in those areas where there is a requirement to provide IFR en route ATC services but the Federal airway system is inadequate.
  5. Federal Airways and Low-Altitude RNAV Routes. Federal airways and low-altitude RNAV routes are Class E airspace areas and, unless otherwise specified, extend upward from 1,200 feet AGL to, but not including,18,000 feet MSL. (a) Federal airways consist of Low/Medium Frequency (L/MF) airways (colored Federal airways) and VOR Federal airways. (1) L/MF airways are based on non−directional beacons (NDB) and are identified as green, red, amber, or blue. (2) VOR Federal airways are based on VOR/VORTAC facilities and are identified by a “V” prefix. (b) Low-altitude RNAV routes consist of T-routes and helicopter RNAV routes (TK-routes).
  NOTE− See AIM paragraph 5−3−4, Airways and Route Systems, for more details and charting information.
  6. Offshore Airspace Areas. There are Class E airspace areas that extend upward from a specified altitude to, but not including, 18,000 feet MSL and are designated as offshore airspace areas. These areas provide controlled airspace beyond 12 miles from the coast of the U.S. in those areas where there is a requirement to provide IFR en route ATC services and within which the U.S. is applying domestic procedures.

resolved chunk: AIM 3-2-6
  AIM 3-2-6 Class E Airspace
  f. Separation for VFR Aircraft. No separation services are provided to VFR aircraft. Section 3. Class G Airspace

--- G-35 What does a flashing red light from the tower mean in flight?
expected citation: AIM 4-3-13
expected key facts:
  - airport unsafe
  - do not land
  - steady green means cleared to land
  - steady red means give way and continue circling

resolved chunk: AIM 4-3-13
  AIM 4-3-13 Traffic Control Light Signals
  a. The following procedures are used by ATCTs in the control of aircraft, ground vehicles, equipment, and personnel not equipped with radio. These same procedures will be used to control aircraft, ground vehicles, equipment, and personnel equipped with radio if radio contact cannot be established. ATC personnel use a directive traffic control signal which emits an intense narrow light beam of a selected color (either red, white, or green) when controlling traffic by light signals.
  b. Although the traffic signal light offers the advantage that some control may be exercised over nonradio equipped aircraft, pilots should be cognizant of the disadvantages which are:
  1. Pilots may not be looking at the control tower at the time a signal is directed toward their aircraft.
  2. The directions transmitted by a light signal are very limited since only approval or disapproval of a pilot’s anticipated actions may be transmitted. No supplement or explanatory information may be transmitted except by the use of the “General Warning Signal” which advises the pilot to be on the alert.
  c. Between sunset and sunrise, a pilot wishing to attract the attention of the control tower should turn on a landing light and taxi the aircraft into a position, clear of the active runway, so that light is visible to the tower. The landing light should remain on until appropriate signals are received from the tower.
  d. Airport Traffic Control Tower Light Gun Signals. (See TBL 4−3−1.)
  e. During daylight hours, acknowledge tower transmissions or light signals by moving the ailerons or rudder. At night, acknowledge by blinking the landing or navigation lights. If radio malfunction occurs after departing the parking area, watch the tower for light signals or monitor tower frequency. TBL 4−3−1 Airport Traffic Control Tower Light Gun Signals Meaning Color and Type of Signal Movement of Vehicles, Equipment and Personnel Aircraft on the Ground Aircraft in Flight Steady green Cleared to cross, proceed or go Cleared for takeoff Cleared to land Flashing green Not applicable Cleared for taxi Return for landing (to be followed by steady green at the proper time) Steady red STOP STOP Give way to other aircraft and continue circling Flashing red Clear the taxiway/runway Taxi clear of the runway in use Airport unsafe, do not land Flashing white Return to starting point on airport Return to starting point on airport Not applicable Alternating red and green Exercise extreme caution Exercise extreme caution Exercise extreme caution

--- G-36 How do I avoid wake turbulence landing behind a large aircraft?
expected citation: AIM 7-4-6
expected key facts:
  - stay at or above the larger aircraft's flight path
  - land beyond the larger aircraft's touchdown point

resolved chunk: AIM 7-4-6
  AIM 7-4-6 Vortex Avoidance Procedures
  a. Under certain conditions, airport traffic controllers apply procedures for separating IFR aircraft. If a pilot accepts a clearance to visually follow a preceding aircraft, the pilot accepts responsibility for separation and wake turbulence avoidance. The controllers will also provide to VFR aircraft, with whom they are in communication and which in the tower’s opinion may be adversely affected by wake turbulence from a larger aircraft, the position, altitude and direction of flight of larger aircraft followed by the phrase “CAUTION − WAKE TURBULENCE.” After issuing the caution for wake turbulence, the airport traffic controllers generally do not provide additional information to the following aircraft unless the airport traffic controllers know the following aircraft is overtaking the preceding aircraft. WHETHER OR NOT A WARNING OR INFORMATION HAS BEEN GIVEN, HOWEVER, THE PILOT IS EXPECTED TO ADJUST AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS AND FLIGHT PATH AS NECESSARY TO PRECLUDE SERIOUS WAKE ENCOUNTERS. When any doubt exists about maintaining safe separation distances between aircraft during approaches, pilots should ask the control tower for updates on separation distance and aircraft groundspeed.
  b. The following vortex avoidance procedures are recommended for the various situations:
  1. Landing behind a larger aircraft− same runway. Stay at or above the larger aircraft’s final approach flight path−note its touchdown point−land beyond it.
  2. Landing behind a larger aircraft− when parallel runway is closer than 2,500 feet. Consider possible drift to your runway. Stay at or above the larger aircraft’s final approach flight path− note its touchdown point.
  3. Landing behind a larger aircraft− crossing runway. Cross above the larger aircraft’s flight path.
  4. Landing behind a departing larger aircraft− same runway. Note the larger aircraft’s rotation point− land well prior to rotation point.
  5. Landing behind a departing larger aircraft− crossing runway. Note the larger aircraft’s rotation point− if past the intersection− continue the approach− land prior to the intersection. If larger aircraft rotates prior to the intersection, avoid flight below the larger aircraft’s flight path. Abandon the approach unless a landing is ensured well before reaching the intersection.
  6. Departing behind a larger aircraft. Note the larger aircraft’s rotation point and rotate prior to the larger aircraft’s rotation point. Continue climbing above the larger aircraft’s climb path until turning clear of the larger aircraft’s wake. Avoid subsequent headings which will cross below and behind a larger aircraft. Be alert for any critical takeoff situation which could lead to a vortex encounter.
  7. Intersection takeoffs− same runway. Be alert to adjacent larger aircraft operations, particularly upwind of your runway. If intersection takeoff clearance is received, avoid subsequent heading which will cross below a larger aircraft’s path.
  8. Departing or landing after a larger aircraft executing a low approach, missed approach, or touch−and−go landing. Because vortices settle and move laterally near the ground, the vortex hazard may exist along the runway and in your flight path after a larger aircraft has executed a low approach, missed approach, or a touch−and−go landing, particular in light quartering wind conditions. You should ensure that an interval of at least 2 minutes has elapsed before your takeoff or landing.
  9. En route VFR (thousand−foot altitude plus 500 feet). Avoid flight below and behind a large aircraft’s path. If a larger aircraft is observed above on the same track (meeting or overtaking) adjust your position laterally, preferably upwind.

--- G-37 What are the symptoms and types of hypoxia?
expected citation: AIM 8-1-2
expected key facts:
  - hypoxic hypoxia
  - hypemic hypoxia
  - stagnant hypoxia
  - histotoxic hypoxia
  - symptoms include euphoria, impaired judgment, and cyanosis

resolved chunk: AIM 8-1-2
  AIM 8-1-2 Effects of Altitude
  a. Hypoxia.
  1. Hypoxia is a state of oxygen deficiency in the body sufficient to impair functions of the brain and other organs. Hypoxia from exposure to altitude is due only to the reduced barometric pressures encountered at altitude, for the concentration of oxygen in the atmosphere remains about 21 percent from the ground out to space.
  2. Although a deterioration in night vision occurs at a cabin pressure altitude as low as 5,000 feet, other significant effects of altitude hypoxia usually do not occur in the normal healthy pilot below 12,000 feet. From 12,000 to 15,000 feet of altitude, judgment, memory, alertness, coordination and ability to make calculations are impaired, and headache, drowsiness, dizziness and either a sense of well-being (euphoria) or belligerence occur. The effects appear following increasingly shorter periods of exposure to increasing altitude. In fact, pilot performance can seriously deteriorate within 15 minutes at 15,000 feet.
  3. At cabin pressure altitudes above 15,000 feet, the periphery of the visual field grays out to a point where only central vision remains (tunnel vision). A blue coloration (cyanosis) of the fingernails and lips develops. The ability to take corrective and protective action is lost in 20 to 30 minutes at 18,000 feet and 5 to 12 minutes at 20,000 feet, followed soon thereafter by unconsciousness.
  4. The altitude at which significant effects of hypoxia occur can be lowered by a number of factors. Carbon monoxide inhaled in smoking or from exhaust fumes, lowered hemoglobin (anemia), and certain medications can reduce the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood to the degree that the amount of oxygen provided to body tissues will already be equivalent to the oxygen provided to the tissues when exposed to a cabin pressure altitude of several thousand feet. Small amounts of alcohol and low doses of certain drugs, such as antihistamines, tranquilizers, sedatives and analgesics can, through their depressant action, render the brain much more susceptible to hypoxia. Extreme heat and cold, fever, and anxiety increase the body’s demand for oxygen, and hence its susceptibility to hypoxia.
  5. The effects of hypoxia are usually quite difficult to recognize, especially when they occur gradually. Since symptoms of hypoxia do not vary in an individual, the ability to recognize hypoxia can be greatly improved by experiencing and witnessing the effects of hypoxia during an altitude chamber “flight.” The FAA provides this opportunity through aviation physiology training, which is conducted at the FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute and at many military facilities across the U.S. To attend the Physiological Training Program at the Civil Aeromedical Institute, Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, contact by telephone (405) 954−6212, or by writing Aerospace Medical Education Division, AAM−400, CAMI, Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center, P.O. Box 25082, Oklahoma City, OK 73125.
  NOTE− To attend the physiological training program at one of the military installations having the training capability, an application form and a fee must be submitted. Full particulars about location, fees, scheduling procedures, course content, individual requirements, etc., are contained in the Physiological Training Application, Form Number AC 3150−7, which is obtained by contacting the accident prevention specialist or the office forms manager in the nearest FAA office.
  6. Hypoxia is prevented by heeding factors that reduce tolerance to altitude, by enriching the inspired air with oxygen from an appropriate oxygen system, and by maintaining a comfortable, safe cabin pressure altitude. For optimum protection, pilots are encouraged to use supplemental oxygen above 10,000 feet during the day, and above 5,000 feet at night. The CFRs require that at the minimum, flight crew be provided with and use supplemental oxygen after 30 minutes of exposure to cabin pressure altitudes between 12,500 and 14,000 feet and immediately on exposure to cabin pressure altitudes above 14,000 feet. Every occupant of the aircraft must be provided with supplemental oxygen at cabin pressure altitudes above 15,000 feet.

resolved chunk: AIM 8-1-2
  AIM 8-1-2 Effects of Altitude
  b. Ear Block.
  1. As the aircraft cabin pressure decreases during ascent, the expanding air in the middle ear pushes the eustachian tube open, and by escaping down it to the nasal passages, equalizes in pressure with the cabin pressure. But during descent, the pilot must periodically open the eustachian tube to equalize pressure. This can be accomplished by swallowing, yawning, tensing muscles in the throat, or if these do not work, by a combination of closing the mouth, pinching the nose closed, and attempting to blow through the nostrils (Valsalva maneuver).
  2. Either an upper respiratory infection, such as a cold or sore throat, or a nasal allergic condition can produce enough congestion around the eustachian tube to make equalization difficult. Consequently, the difference in pressure between the middle ear and aircraft cabin can build up to a level that will hold the eustachian tube closed, making equalization difficult if not impossible. The problem is commonly referred to as an “ear block.”
  3. An ear block produces severe ear pain and loss of hearing that can last from several hours to several days. Rupture of the ear drum can occur in flight or after landing. Fluid can accumulate in the middle ear and become infected.
  4. An ear block is prevented by not flying with an upper respiratory infection or nasal allergic condition. Adequate protection is usually not provided by decongestant sprays or drops to reduce congestion around the eustachian tubes. Oral decongestants have side effects that can significantly impair pilot performance.
  5. If an ear block does not clear shortly after landing, a physician should be consulted.

resolved chunk: AIM 8-1-2
  AIM 8-1-2 Effects of Altitude
  c. Sinus Block.
  1. During ascent and descent, air pressure in the sinuses equalizes with the aircraft cabin pressure through small openings that connect the sinuses to the nasal passages. Either an upper respiratory infection, such as a cold or sinusitis, or a nasal allergic condition can produce enough congestion around an opening to slow equalization, and as the difference in pressure between the sinus and cabin mounts, eventually plug the opening. This “sinus block” occurs most frequently during descent.
  2. A sinus block can occur in the frontal sinuses, located above each eyebrow, or in the maxillary sinuses, located in each upper cheek. It will usually produce excruciating pain over the sinus area. A maxillary sinus block can also make the upper teeth ache. Bloody mucus may discharge from the nasal passages.
  3. A sinus block is prevented by not flying with an upper respiratory infection or nasal allergic condition. Adequate protection is usually not provided by decongestant sprays or drops to reduce congestion around the sinus openings. Oral decongestants have side effects that can impair pilot performance.
  4. If a sinus block does not clear shortly after landing, a physician should be consulted.

resolved chunk: AIM 8-1-2
  AIM 8-1-2 Effects of Altitude
  d. Decompression Sickness After Scuba Diving.
  1. A pilot or passenger who intends to fly after scuba diving should allow the body sufficient time to rid itself of excess nitrogen absorbed during diving. If not, altitude decompression sickness due to evolved nitrogen gas can occur during exposure to reduced barometric pressure (i.e., low cabin pressure) associated with increased altitude and may lead to a serious inflight emergency.
  2. The recommended wait time before going to flight altitudes up to 8,000 feet is at least 12 hours after diving that did not require a controlled ascent (i.e., non−decompression stop diving), and at least 24 hours after diving that required a controlled ascent (i.e., decompression stop diving). The recommended wait time before going to flight altitudes above 8,000 feet is at least 24 hours after any SCUBA dive. These recommended altitudes are actual flight altitudes above mean sea level (AMSL) and not pressurized cabin altitudes. This takes into consideration the risk of aircraft decompression during flight.

--- G-38 How long should I wait to fly after scuba diving?
expected citation: AIM 8-1-2(d)
expected key facts:
  - 12 hours after a non-decompression dive before flights up to 8,000 ft
  - 24 hours before flights above 8,000 ft
  - 24 hours after decompression dives

resolved chunk: AIM 8-1-2
  AIM 8-1-2 Effects of Altitude
  a. Hypoxia.
  1. Hypoxia is a state of oxygen deficiency in the body sufficient to impair functions of the brain and other organs. Hypoxia from exposure to altitude is due only to the reduced barometric pressures encountered at altitude, for the concentration of oxygen in the atmosphere remains about 21 percent from the ground out to space.
  2. Although a deterioration in night vision occurs at a cabin pressure altitude as low as 5,000 feet, other significant effects of altitude hypoxia usually do not occur in the normal healthy pilot below 12,000 feet. From 12,000 to 15,000 feet of altitude, judgment, memory, alertness, coordination and ability to make calculations are impaired, and headache, drowsiness, dizziness and either a sense of well-being (euphoria) or belligerence occur. The effects appear following increasingly shorter periods of exposure to increasing altitude. In fact, pilot performance can seriously deteriorate within 15 minutes at 15,000 feet.
  3. At cabin pressure altitudes above 15,000 feet, the periphery of the visual field grays out to a point where only central vision remains (tunnel vision). A blue coloration (cyanosis) of the fingernails and lips develops. The ability to take corrective and protective action is lost in 20 to 30 minutes at 18,000 feet and 5 to 12 minutes at 20,000 feet, followed soon thereafter by unconsciousness.
  4. The altitude at which significant effects of hypoxia occur can be lowered by a number of factors. Carbon monoxide inhaled in smoking or from exhaust fumes, lowered hemoglobin (anemia), and certain medications can reduce the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood to the degree that the amount of oxygen provided to body tissues will already be equivalent to the oxygen provided to the tissues when exposed to a cabin pressure altitude of several thousand feet. Small amounts of alcohol and low doses of certain drugs, such as antihistamines, tranquilizers, sedatives and analgesics can, through their depressant action, render the brain much more susceptible to hypoxia. Extreme heat and cold, fever, and anxiety increase the body’s demand for oxygen, and hence its susceptibility to hypoxia.
  5. The effects of hypoxia are usually quite difficult to recognize, especially when they occur gradually. Since symptoms of hypoxia do not vary in an individual, the ability to recognize hypoxia can be greatly improved by experiencing and witnessing the effects of hypoxia during an altitude chamber “flight.” The FAA provides this opportunity through aviation physiology training, which is conducted at the FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute and at many military facilities across the U.S. To attend the Physiological Training Program at the Civil Aeromedical Institute, Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, contact by telephone (405) 954−6212, or by writing Aerospace Medical Education Division, AAM−400, CAMI, Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center, P.O. Box 25082, Oklahoma City, OK 73125.
  NOTE− To attend the physiological training program at one of the military installations having the training capability, an application form and a fee must be submitted. Full particulars about location, fees, scheduling procedures, course content, individual requirements, etc., are contained in the Physiological Training Application, Form Number AC 3150−7, which is obtained by contacting the accident prevention specialist or the office forms manager in the nearest FAA office.
  6. Hypoxia is prevented by heeding factors that reduce tolerance to altitude, by enriching the inspired air with oxygen from an appropriate oxygen system, and by maintaining a comfortable, safe cabin pressure altitude. For optimum protection, pilots are encouraged to use supplemental oxygen above 10,000 feet during the day, and above 5,000 feet at night. The CFRs require that at the minimum, flight crew be provided with and use supplemental oxygen after 30 minutes of exposure to cabin pressure altitudes between 12,500 and 14,000 feet and immediately on exposure to cabin pressure altitudes above 14,000 feet. Every occupant of the aircraft must be provided with supplemental oxygen at cabin pressure altitudes above 15,000 feet.

resolved chunk: AIM 8-1-2
  AIM 8-1-2 Effects of Altitude
  b. Ear Block.
  1. As the aircraft cabin pressure decreases during ascent, the expanding air in the middle ear pushes the eustachian tube open, and by escaping down it to the nasal passages, equalizes in pressure with the cabin pressure. But during descent, the pilot must periodically open the eustachian tube to equalize pressure. This can be accomplished by swallowing, yawning, tensing muscles in the throat, or if these do not work, by a combination of closing the mouth, pinching the nose closed, and attempting to blow through the nostrils (Valsalva maneuver).
  2. Either an upper respiratory infection, such as a cold or sore throat, or a nasal allergic condition can produce enough congestion around the eustachian tube to make equalization difficult. Consequently, the difference in pressure between the middle ear and aircraft cabin can build up to a level that will hold the eustachian tube closed, making equalization difficult if not impossible. The problem is commonly referred to as an “ear block.”
  3. An ear block produces severe ear pain and loss of hearing that can last from several hours to several days. Rupture of the ear drum can occur in flight or after landing. Fluid can accumulate in the middle ear and become infected.
  4. An ear block is prevented by not flying with an upper respiratory infection or nasal allergic condition. Adequate protection is usually not provided by decongestant sprays or drops to reduce congestion around the eustachian tubes. Oral decongestants have side effects that can significantly impair pilot performance.
  5. If an ear block does not clear shortly after landing, a physician should be consulted.

resolved chunk: AIM 8-1-2
  AIM 8-1-2 Effects of Altitude
  c. Sinus Block.
  1. During ascent and descent, air pressure in the sinuses equalizes with the aircraft cabin pressure through small openings that connect the sinuses to the nasal passages. Either an upper respiratory infection, such as a cold or sinusitis, or a nasal allergic condition can produce enough congestion around an opening to slow equalization, and as the difference in pressure between the sinus and cabin mounts, eventually plug the opening. This “sinus block” occurs most frequently during descent.
  2. A sinus block can occur in the frontal sinuses, located above each eyebrow, or in the maxillary sinuses, located in each upper cheek. It will usually produce excruciating pain over the sinus area. A maxillary sinus block can also make the upper teeth ache. Bloody mucus may discharge from the nasal passages.
  3. A sinus block is prevented by not flying with an upper respiratory infection or nasal allergic condition. Adequate protection is usually not provided by decongestant sprays or drops to reduce congestion around the sinus openings. Oral decongestants have side effects that can impair pilot performance.
  4. If a sinus block does not clear shortly after landing, a physician should be consulted.

resolved chunk: AIM 8-1-2
  AIM 8-1-2 Effects of Altitude
  d. Decompression Sickness After Scuba Diving.
  1. A pilot or passenger who intends to fly after scuba diving should allow the body sufficient time to rid itself of excess nitrogen absorbed during diving. If not, altitude decompression sickness due to evolved nitrogen gas can occur during exposure to reduced barometric pressure (i.e., low cabin pressure) associated with increased altitude and may lead to a serious inflight emergency.
  2. The recommended wait time before going to flight altitudes up to 8,000 feet is at least 12 hours after diving that did not require a controlled ascent (i.e., non−decompression stop diving), and at least 24 hours after diving that required a controlled ascent (i.e., decompression stop diving). The recommended wait time before going to flight altitudes above 8,000 feet is at least 24 hours after any SCUBA dive. These recommended altitudes are actual flight altitudes above mean sea level (AMSL) and not pressurized cabin altitudes. This takes into consideration the risk of aircraft decompression during flight.

--- G-39 How should I enter the traffic pattern at a non-towered airport?
expected citation: AIM 4-3-3
expected key facts:
  - enter at 45 degrees to the downwind leg
  - enter at pattern altitude

resolved chunk: AIM 4-3-3
  AIM 4-3-3 Traffic Patterns
  a. It is recommended that aircraft enter the airport traffic pattern at one of the following altitudes listed below. These altitudes should be maintained unless another traffic pattern altitude is published in the Chart Supplement or unless otherwise required by the applicable distance from cloud criteria (14 CFR Section 91.155). (See FIG 4−3−2 and FIG 4−3−3):
  1. Propeller−driven aircraft enter the traffic pattern at 1,000 feet above ground level (AGL).
  2. Large and turbine−powered aircraft enter the traffic pattern at an altitude of not less than 1,500 feet AGL or 500 feet above the established pattern altitude.
  3. Helicopters operating in the traffic pattern may fly a pattern similar to the fixed−wing aircraft pattern, but at a lower altitude (500 AGL) and closer to the runway. This pattern may be on the opposite side of the runway from fixed−wing traffic when airspeed requires or for practice power−off landings (autorotation) and if local policy permits. Landings not to the runway must avoid the flow of fixed wing traffic.
  b. A pilot may vary the size of the traffic pattern depending on the aircraft’s performance characteristics. Pilots of en route aircraft should be constantly alert for aircraft in traffic patterns and avoid these areas whenever possible.
  c. Unless otherwise indicated, all turns in the traffic pattern must be made to the left, except for helicopters, as applicable.
  d. On Sectional, Aeronautical, and VFR Terminal Area Charts, right traffic patterns are indicated at public−use and joint−use airports with the abbreviation “RP” (for Right Pattern), followed by the appropriate runway number(s) at the bottom of the airport data block.
  EXAMPLE− RP 9, 18, 22R
  NOTE−
  1. Pilots are encouraged to use the standard traffic pattern. However, those pilots who choose to execute a straight−in approach, maneuvering for and execution of the approach should not disrupt the flow of arriving and departing traffic. Likewise, pilots operating in the traffic pattern should be alert at all times for aircraft executing straight−in approaches.
  REFERENCE− AC 90−66B, Non−Towered Airport Flight Operations.
  2. *RP indicates special conditions exist and refers pilots to the Chart Supplement.
  3. Right traffic patterns are not shown at airports with full−time control towers.
  e. Wind conditions affect all airplanes in varying degrees. Figure 4-3-4 is an example of a chart used to determine the headwind, crosswind, and tailwind components based on wind direction and velocity relative to the runway. Pilots should refer to similar information provided by the aircraft manufacturer when determining these wind components. FIG 4−3−2 Traffic Pattern Operations Single Runway
  EXAMPLE− Key to traffic pattern operations
  1. Enter pattern in level flight, abeam the midpoint of the runway, at pattern altitude.
  2. Maintain pattern altitude until abeam approach end of the landing runway on downwind leg.
  3. Complete turn to final at least 1 / 4 mile from the runway.
  4. Continue straight ahead until beyond departure end of runway.
  5. If remaining in the traffic pattern, commence turn to crosswind leg beyond the departure end of the runway within 300 feet of pattern altitude.
  6. If departing the traffic pattern, continue straight out, or exit with a 45 degree turn (to the left when in a left−hand traffic pattern; to the right when in a right−hand traffic pattern) beyond the departure end of the runway, after reaching pattern altitude. FIG 4−3−3 Traffic Pattern Operations Parallel Runways
  EXAMPLE− Key to traffic pattern operations
  1. Enter pattern in level flight, abeam the midpoint of the runway, at pattern altitude.
  2. Maintain pattern altitude until abeam approach end of the landing runway on downwind leg.
  3. Complete turn to final at least 1 / 4 mile from the runway.
  4. Continue straight ahead until beyond departure end of runway.
  5. If remaining in the traffic pattern, commence turn to crosswind leg beyond the departure end of the runway within 300 feet of pattern altitude.
  6. If departing the traffic pattern, continue straight out, or exit with a 45 degree turn (to the left when in a left−hand traffic pattern; to the right when in a right−hand traffic pattern) beyond the departure end of the runway, after reaching pattern altitude.
  7. Do not overshoot final or continue on a track which will penetrate the final approach of the parallel runway.
  8. Do not continue on a track which will penetrate the departure path of the parallel runway. FIG 4−3−4 Headwind/Tailwind/Crosswind Component Calculator

--- G-40 What transponder code do I squawk for a radio failure?
expected citation: AIM 6-4-2 / 4-1-20
expected key facts:
  - 7600 for radio failure
  - 7500 for hijacking
  - 7700 for emergency

resolved chunk: AIM 6-4-2
  AIM 6-4-2 Transponder Operation During Two-way Communications Failure
  a. If an aircraft with a coded radar beacon transponder experiences a loss of two-way radio capability, the pilot should adjust the transponder to reply on Mode A/3, Code 7600.
  b. The pilot should understand that the aircraft may not be in an area of radar coverage.

resolved chunk: AIM 4-1-20
  AIM 4-1-20 Transponder and ADS−B Out Operation
  a. General
  1. Pilots should be aware that proper application of transponder and ADS−B operating procedures will provide both VFR and IFR aircraft with a higher degree of safety while operating on the ground and airborne. Transponder/ADS−B panel designs differ; therefore, a pilot should be thoroughly familiar with the operation of their particular equipment to maximize its full potential. ADS−B Out, and transponders with altitude reporting mode turned ON (Mode C or S), substantially increase the capability of surveillance systems to see an aircraft. This provides air traffic controllers, as well as pilots of suitably equipped aircraft (TCAS and ADS−B In), increased situational awareness and the ability to identify potential traffic conflicts. Even VFR pilots who are not in contact with ATC will be afforded greater protection from IFR aircraft and VFR aircraft that are receiving traffic advisories. Nevertheless, pilots should never relax their visual scanning for other aircraft, and should include the ADS−B In display (if equipped) in their normal traffic scan.
  2. Air Traffic Control Radar Beacon System (ATCRBS) is similar to and compatible with military coded radar beacon equipment. Civil Mode A is identical to military Mode 3.
  3. Transponder and ADS-B operations on the ground . Civil and military aircraft should operate with the transponder in the altitude reporting mode (consult the aircraft’s flight manual to determine the specific transponder position to enable altitude reporting) and ADS−B Out transmissions enabled at all airports, any time the aircraft is positioned on any portion of the airport movement area. This includes all defined taxiways and runways. Pilots must pay particular attention to ATIS and airport diagram notations, General Notes (included on airport charts), and comply with directions pertaining to transponder and ADS-B usage. Generally, these directions are: (a) Departures. Select the transponder mode which allows altitude reporting and enable ADS-B during pushback or taxi-out from parking spot. Select TA or TA/RA (if equipped with TCAS) when taking the active runway. (b) Arrivals. If TCAS equipped, deselect TA or TA/RA upon leaving the active runway, but continue transponder and ADS−B transmissions in the altitude reporting mode. Select STBY or OFF for transponder and ADS−B upon arriving at the aircraft’s parking spot or gate.
  4. Transponder and ADS-B Operations While Airborne. (a) Unless otherwise requested by ATC, aircraft equipped with an ATC transponder maintained in accordance with 14 CFR Section 91.413 MUST operate with this equipment on the appropriate Mode 3/A code, or other code as assigned by ATC, and with altitude reporting enabled whenever in controlled airspace. If practicable, aircraft SHOULD operate with the transponder enabled in uncontrolled airspace. (b) Aircraft equipped with ADS−B Out MUST operate with this equipment in the transmit mode at all times, unless otherwise requested by ATC.
  5. Transponder and ADS−B Operation Under Visual Flight Rules (VFR). (a) Unless otherwise instructed by an ATC facility, adjust transponder/ADS−B to reply on Mode 3/A Code 1200 regardless of altitude. (b) When required to operate their transponder/ADS−B, pilots must always operate that equipment with altitude reporting enabled unless otherwise instructed by ATC or unless the installed equipment has not been tested and calibrated as required by 14 CFR Section 91.217. If deactivation is required, turn off altitude reporting. (c) When participating in a VFR standard formation flight that is not receiving ATC services, only the lead aircraft should operate its transponder and ADS−B Out and squawk code 1203. Once established in formation, all other aircraft should squawk standby and disable ADS−B transmissions.
  NOTE−
  1. If the formation flight is receiving ATC services, pilots can expect ATC to direct all non−lead aircraft to STOP Squawk, and should not do so until instructed.
  2. Firefighting aircraft not in contact with ATC may squawk 1255 in lieu of 1200 while en route to, from, or within the designated firefighting area(s).
  3. VFR aircraft flying authorized SAR missions for the USAF or USCG may be advised to squawk 1277 in lieu of 1200 while en route to, from, or within the designated search area.
  4. VFR gliders should squawk 1202 in lieu of 1200.
  REFERENCE− FAA Order JO 7110.66, National Beacon Code Allocation Plan (NBCAP).
  6. A pilot on an IFR flight who elects to cancel the IFR flight plan prior to reaching their destination, should adjust the transponder/ADS−B according to VFR operations.
  7. If entering a U.S. OFFSHORE AIRSPACE AREA from outside the U.S., the pilot should advise on first radio contact with a U.S. radar ATC facility that such equipment is available by adding “transponder” or “ADS−B” (if equipped) to the aircraft identification.
  8. It should be noted by all users of ATC transponders and ADS−B Out systems that the surveillance coverage they can expect is limited to “line of sight” with ground radar and ADS−B radio sites. Low altitude or aircraft antenna shielding by the aircraft itself may result in reduced range or loss of aircraft contact. Though ADS−B often provides superior reception at low altitudes, poor coverage from any surveillance system can be improved by climbing to a higher altitude.
  NOTE− Pilots should refer to AIM, paragraph 4−5−7, Automatic Dependent Surveillance − Broadcast (ADS−B) Services, for a complete description of operating limitations and procedures.

resolved chunk: AIM 4-1-20
  AIM 4-1-20 Transponder and ADS−B Out Operation
  b. Transponder/ADS−B Code Designation
  1. For ATC to utilize one of the 4096 discrete codes, a four−digit code designation will be used; for example, code 2102 will be expressed as “TWO ONE ZERO TWO.”
  NOTE− Circumstances may occasionally require ATC to assign a non−discrete code; i.e., a code ending in “00.”
  REFERENCE− FAA Order JO 7110.66, National Beacon Code Allocation Plan (NBCAP).

resolved chunk: AIM 4-1-20
  AIM 4-1-20 Transponder and ADS−B Out Operation
  c. Automatic Altitude Reporting
  1. Most transponders (Modes C and S) and all ADS−B Out systems are capable of automatic altitude reporting. This system converts aircraft altitude in 100−foot increments to coded digital information that is transmitted to the appropriate surveillance facility as well as to ADS−B In and TCAS systems.
  2. Adjust the transponder/ADS−B to reply on the Mode 3/A code specified by ATC and with altitude reporting enabled, unless otherwise directed by ATC or unless the altitude reporting equipment has not been tested and calibrated as required by 14 CFR Section 91.217. If deactivation is required by ATC, turn off the altitude reporting feature of your transponder/ADS−B. An instruction by ATC to “STOP ALTITUDE SQUAWK, ALTITUDE DIFFERS BY (number of feet) FEET,” may be an indication that the transmitted altitude information is incorrect, or that the aircraft’s altimeter setting is incorrect. While an incorrect altimeter setting has no effect on the transmitted altitude information, it will cause the aircraft to fly at a true altitude different from the assigned altitude. When a controller indicates that an altitude readout is invalid, the pilot should verify that the aircraft altimeter is set correctly.
  NOTE− Altitude encoders are preset at standard atmospheric pressure. Local altimeter correction is applied by the surveillance facility before the altitude information is presented to ATC.
  3. Pilots should report exact altitude or flight level to the nearest hundred foot increment when establishing initial contact with an ATC facility. Exact altitude or flight level reports on initial contact provide ATC with information that is required prior to using automatically reported altitude information for separation purposes. This will significantly reduce altitude verification requests.

resolved chunk: AIM 4-1-20
  AIM 4-1-20 Transponder and ADS−B Out Operation
  d. IDENT Feature Transponder/ADS−B Out equipment must be operated only as specified by ATC. Activate the “IDENT” feature only when requested by ATC.

resolved chunk: AIM 4-1-20
  AIM 4-1-20 Transponder and ADS−B Out Operation
  e. Code Changes
  1. When making routine code changes, pilots should avoid inadvertent selection of Codes 7500, 7600 or 7700 thereby causing momentary false alarms at automated ground facilities. For example, when switching from Code 2700 to Code 7200, switch first to 2200 then to 7200, NOT to 7700 and then 7200. This procedure applies to nondiscrete Code 7500 and all discrete codes in the 7600 and 7700 series (i.e., 7600−7677, 7700−7777) which will trigger special indicators in automated facilities. Only nondiscrete Code 7500 will be decoded as the hijack code.
  2. Under no circumstances should a pilot of a civil aircraft operate the transponder on Code 7777. This code is reserved for military interceptor operations.
  3. Military pilots operating VFR or IFR within restricted/warning areas should adjust their transponders to Code 4000 unless another code has been assigned by ATC.

resolved chunk: AIM 4-1-20
  AIM 4-1-20 Transponder and ADS−B Out Operation
  f. Mode C Transponder and ADS−B Out Requirements
  1. Specific details concerning requirements to carry and operate Mode C transponders and ADS−B Out, as well as exceptions and ATC authorized deviations from those requirements, are found in 14 CFR Sections 91.215, 91.225, and 99.13.
  2. In general, the CFRs require aircraft to be equipped with an operable Mode C transponder and ADS−B Out when operating: (a) In Class A, Class B, or Class C airspace areas; (b) Above the ceiling and within the lateral boundaries of Class B or Class C airspace up to 10,000 feet MSL; (c) Class E airspace at and above 10,000 feet MSL within the 48 contiguous states and the District of Columbia, excluding the airspace at and below 2,500 feet AGL; (d) Within 30 miles of a Class B airspace primary airport, below 10,000 feet MSL (commonly referred to as the “Mode C Veil”); (e) For ADS−B Out: Class E airspace at and above 3,000 feet MSL over the Gulf of Mexico from the coastline of the United States out to 12 nautical miles.
  NOTE− The airspace described in (e) above is specified in 14 CFR § 91.225 for ADS−B Out requirements. However, 14 CFR § 91.215 does not include this airspace for ATC transponder requirements. (f) Transponder and ADS−B Out requirements do not apply to any aircraft that was not originally certificated with an electrical system, or that has not subsequently been certified with such a system installed, including balloons and gliders. These aircraft may conduct operations without a transponder or ADS−B Out when operating: (1) Outside any Class B or Class C airspace area; and (2) Below the altitude of the ceiling of a Class B or Class C airspace area designated for an airport, or 10,000 feet MSL, whichever is lower.
  3. 14 CFR Section 99.13 requires all aircraft flying into, within, or across the contiguous U.S. ADIZ be equipped with a Mode C or Mode S transponder. Balloons, gliders and aircraft not equipped with an engine−driven electrical system are excepted from this requirement.
  REFERENCE− AIM, Chapter 5, Section 6, National Security and Interception Procedures.
  4. Pilots must ensure that their aircraft transponder/ADS−B is operating on an appropriate ATC−assigned VFR/IFR code with altitude reporting enabled when operating in such airspace. If in doubt about the operational status of either feature of your transponder while airborne, contact the nearest ATC facility or FSS and they will advise you what facility you should contact for determining the status of your equipment.
  5. In−flight requests for “immediate” deviation from the transponder requirements may be approved by controllers only for failed equipment, and only when the flight will continue IFR or when weather conditions prevent VFR descent and continued VFR flight in airspace not affected by the CFRs. All other requests for deviation should be made at least 1 hour before the proposed operation by contacting the nearest Flight Service or Air Traffic facility in person or by telephone. The nearest ARTCC will normally be the controlling agency and is responsible for coordinating requests involving deviations in other ARTCC areas.
  6. In−flight requests for “immediate” deviation from the ADS−B Out requirements may be approved by ATC only for failed equipment, and may be accommodated based on workload, alternate surveillance availability, or other factors. All other requests for deviation must be made at least 1 hour before the proposed operation, following the procedures contained in Advisory Circular (AC) 90−114, Automatic Dependent Surveillance−Broadcast Operations.

resolved chunk: AIM 4-1-20
  AIM 4-1-20 Transponder and ADS−B Out Operation
  g. Cooperative Surveillance Phraseology. Air traffic controllers, both civil and military, will use the following phraseology when referring to operation of cooperative ATC surveillance equipment. Except as noted, the following ATC instructions do not apply to military transponders operating in other than Mode 3/A/C/S.
  1. SQUAWK (number). Operate radar beacon transponder/ADS−B on designated code with altitude reporting enabled.
  2. IDENT. Engage the “IDENT” feature (military I/P) of the transponder/ADS−B.
  3. SQUAWK (number) AND IDENT. Operate transponder/ADS−B on specified code with altitude reporting enabled, and engage the “IDENT” (military I/P) feature.
  4. SQUAWK STANDBY. Switch transponder/ADS−B to standby position.
  5. SQUAWK NORMAL. Resume normal transponder/ADS−B operation on previously assigned code. (Used after “SQUAWK STANDBY,” or by military after specific transponder tests).
  6. SQUAWK ALTITUDE. Activate Mode C with automatic altitude reporting.
  7. STOP ALTITUDE SQUAWK. Turn off automatic altitude reporting.
  8. STOP SQUAWK (Mode in use). Stop transponder and ADS−B Out transmissions, or switch off only specified mode of the aircraft transponder (military).
  9. SQUAWK MAYDAY. Operate transponder/ADS−B in the emergency position (Mode A Code 7700 for civil transponder. Mode 3 Code 7700 and emergency feature for military transponder.)
  10. SQUAWK VFR. Operate radar beacon transponder/ADS−B on Code 1200 in the Mode A/3, or other appropriate VFR code, with altitude reporting enabled.

--- G-41 What is spatial disorientation and how do I handle it?
expected citation: AIM 8-1-5
expected key facts:
  - conflict between vestibular or bodily sensation and actual orientation
  - rely on instruments

resolved chunk: AIM 8-1-5
  AIM 8-1-5 Illusions in Flight
  a. Introduction. Many different illusions can be experienced in flight. Some can lead to spatial disorientation. Others can lead to landing errors. Illusions rank among the most common factors cited as contributing to fatal aircraft accidents.

resolved chunk: AIM 8-1-5
  AIM 8-1-5 Illusions in Flight
  b. Illusions Leading to Spatial Disorientation.
  1. Various complex motions and forces and certain visual scenes encountered in flight can create illusions of motion and position. Spatial disorientation from these illusions can be prevented only by visual reference to reliable, fixed points on the ground or to flight instruments.
  2. The leans. An abrupt correction of a banked attitude, which has been entered too slowly to stimulate the motion sensing system in the inner ear, can create the illusion of banking in the opposite direction. The disoriented pilot will roll the aircraft back into its original dangerous attitude, or if level flight is maintained, will feel compelled to lean in the perceived vertical plane until this illusion subsides. (a) Coriolis illusion. An abrupt head movement in a prolonged constant-rate turn that has ceased stimulating the motion sensing system can create the illusion of rotation or movement in an entirely different axis. The disoriented pilot will maneuver the aircraft into a dangerous attitude in an attempt to stop rotation. This most overwhelming of all illusions in flight may be prevented by not making sudden, extreme head movements, particularly while making prolonged constant-rate turns under IFR conditions. (b) Graveyard spin. A proper recovery from a spin that has ceased stimulating the motion sensing system can create the illusion of spinning in the opposite direction. The disoriented pilot will return the aircraft to its original spin. (c) Graveyard spiral. An observed loss of altitude during a coordinated constant-rate turn that has ceased stimulating the motion sensing system can create the illusion of being in a descent with the wings level. The disoriented pilot will pull back on the controls, tightening the spiral and increasing the loss of altitude. (d) Somatogravic illusion. A rapid acceleration during takeoff can create the illusion of being in a nose up attitude. The disoriented pilot will push the aircraft into a nose low, or dive attitude. A rapid deceleration by a quick reduction of the throttles can have the opposite effect, with the disoriented pilot pulling the aircraft into a nose up, or stall attitude. (e) Inversion illusion. An abrupt change from climb to straight and level flight can create the illusion of tumbling backwards. The disoriented pilot will push the aircraft abruptly into a nose low attitude, possibly intensifying this illusion. (f) Elevator illusion. An abrupt upward vertical acceleration, usually by an updraft, can create the illusion of being in a climb. The disoriented pilot will push the aircraft into a nose low attitude. An abrupt downward vertical acceleration, usually by a downdraft, has the opposite effect, with the disoriented pilot pulling the aircraft into a nose up attitude. (g) False horizon. Sloping cloud formations, an obscured horizon, a dark scene spread with ground lights and stars, and certain geometric patterns of ground light can create illusions of not being aligned correctly with the actual horizon. The disoriented pilot will place the aircraft in a dangerous attitude. (h) Autokinesis. In the dark, a static light will appear to move about when stared at for many seconds. The disoriented pilot will lose control of the aircraft in attempting to align it with the light.
  3. Illusions Leading to Landing Errors. (a) Various surface features and atmospheric conditions encountered in landing can create illusions of incorrect height above and distance from the runway threshold. Landing errors from these illusions can be prevented by anticipating them during approaches, aerial visual inspection of unfamiliar airports before landing, using electronic glide slope or VASI systems when available, and maintaining optimum proficiency in landing procedures. (b) Runway width illusion. A narrower-than-usual runway can create the illusion that the aircraft is at a higher altitude than it actually is. The pilot who does not recognize this illusion will fly a lower approach, with the risk of striking objects along the approach path or landing short. A wider-than-usual runway can have the opposite effect, with the risk of leveling out high and landing hard or overshooting the runway. (c) Runway and terrain slopes illusion. An upsloping runway, upsloping terrain, or both, can create the illusion that the aircraft is at a higher altitude than it actually is. The pilot who does not recognize this illusion will fly a lower approach. A downsloping runway, downsloping approach terrain, or both, can have the opposite effect. (d) Featureless terrain illusion. An absence of ground features, as when landing over water, darkened areas, and terrain made featureless by snow, can create the illusion that the aircraft is at a higher altitude than it actually is. The pilot who does not recognize this illusion will fly a lower approach. (e) Atmospheric illusions. Rain on the windscreen can create the illusion of greater height, and atmospheric haze the illusion of being at a greater distance from the runway. The pilot who does not recognize these illusions will fly a lower approach. Penetration of fog can create the illusion of pitching up. The pilot who does not recognize this illusion will steepen the approach, often quite abruptly. (f) Ground lighting illusions. Lights along a straight path, such as a road, and even lights on moving trains can be mistaken for runway and approach lights. Bright runway and approach lighting systems, especially where few lights illuminate the surrounding terrain, may create the illusion of less distance to the runway. The pilot who does not recognize this illusion will fly a higher approach. Conversely, the pilot overflying terrain which has few lights to provide height cues may make a lower than normal approach.

--- G-42 What does the runway holding position marking look like and what does it mean?
expected citation: AIM 2-3-5
expected key facts:
  - four lines: two solid and two dashed
  - hold on the solid-line side
  - cross only with clearance at a towered airport

resolved chunk: AIM 2-3-5
  AIM 2-3-5 Holding Position Markings
  a. Runway Holding Position Markings. For runways, these markings indicate where aircraft MUST STOP when approaching a runway. They consist of four yellow lines, two solid and two dashed, spaced six or twelve inches apart, and extending across the width of the taxiway or runway. The solid lines are always on the side where the aircraft must hold. There are three locations where runway holding position markings are encountered.
  1. Runway Holding Position Markings on Taxiways. These markings identify the locations on a taxiway where aircraft MUST STOP when a clearance has not been issued to proceed onto the runway. Generally, runway holding position markings also identify the boundary of the runway safety area (RSA) for aircraft exiting the runway. Runway holding position markings are shown in FIG 2−3−13 and FIG 2−3−16. When instructed by ATC, “ Hold short of Runway XX ,” the pilot MUST STOP so that no part of the aircraft extends beyond the runway holding position marking. When approaching runways at airports with an operating control tower, pilots must not cross the runway holding position marking without ATC clearance. Pilots approaching runways at airports without an operating control tower must ensure adequate separation from other aircraft, vehicles, and pedestrians prior to crossing the holding position markings. An aircraft exiting a runway is not clear of the runway until all parts of the aircraft have crossed the applicable holding position marking.
  NOTE− Runway holding position markings identify the beginning of an RSA, and a pilot MUST STOP to get clearance before crossing (at airports with operating control towers).
  REFERENCE− AIM, Para 4−3−21, Exiting the Runway After Landing.
  2. Runway Holding Position Markings on Runways. These markings identify the locations on runways where aircraft MUST STOP. These markings are located on runways used by ATC for Land And Hold Short Operations (for example, see FIG 4−3−8) and Taxiing operations. For taxiing operations, the pilot MUST STOP prior to the holding position markings unless explicitly authorized to cross by ATC. A sign with a white inscription on a red background is located adjacent to these holding position markings. (See FIG 2−3−14.) The holding position markings are placed on runways prior to the intersection with another runway, or some designated point. Pilots receiving and accepting instructions “ Cleared to land Runway XX, hold short of Runway YY ” from ATC must either exit Runway XX prior to the holding position markings, or stop at the holding position markings prior to Runway YY. Otherwise, pilots are authorized to use the entire landing length of the runway and disregard the holding position markings.
  3. Holding Position Markings on Taxiways Located in Runway Approach Areas. These markings are used at some airports where it is necessary to hold an aircraft on a taxiway located in the approach or departure area of a runway so that the aircraft does not interfere with the operations on that runway. This marking is collocated with the runway approach/departure area holding position sign. When specifically instructed by ATC, “ Hold short of Runway XX approach or Runway XX departure area, ” the pilot MUST STOP so that no part of the aircraft extends beyond the holding position marking. (See Subparagraph 2−3−8b2, Runway Approach Area Holding Position Sign, and FIG 2−3−15.)

resolved chunk: AIM 2-3-5
  AIM 2-3-5 Holding Position Markings
  b. Holding Position Markings for Instrument Landing System (ILS). Holding position markings for ILS critical areas consist of two yellow solid lines spaced two feet apart connected by pairs of solid lines spaced ten feet apart extending across the width of the taxiway as shown. (See FIG 2−3−16.) A sign with an inscription in white on a red background is located adjacent to these hold position markings. When instructed by ATC to hold short of the ILS critical area, pilots MUST STOP so that no part of the aircraft extends beyond the holding position marking. When approaching the holding position marking, pilots must not cross the marking without ATC clearance. The ILS critical area is not clear until all parts of the aircraft have crossed the applicable holding position marking.
  REFERENCE− AIM, Para 1−1−9, Instrument Landing System (ILS).

resolved chunk: AIM 2-3-5
  AIM 2-3-5 Holding Position Markings
  c. Holding Position Markings for Intersecting Taxiways Holding position markings for intersecting taxiways consist of a single dashed line extending across the width of the taxiway as shown. (See FIG 2−3−17.) They are located on taxiways where ATC holds aircraft short of a taxiway intersection. When instructed by ATC, “ Hold short of Taxiway XX, ” the pilot MUST STOP so that no part of the aircraft extends beyond the holding position marking. When the marking is not present, the pilot MUST STOP the aircraft at a point which provides adequate clearance from an aircraft on the intersecting taxiway.

resolved chunk: AIM 2-3-5
  AIM 2-3-5 Holding Position Markings
  d. Surface Painted Holding Position Signs. Surface painted holding position signs have a red background with a white inscription and supplement the signs located at the holding position. This type of marking is normally used where the width of the holding position on the taxiway is greater than 200 feet (60 m). It is located to the left side of the taxiway centerline on the holding side and prior to the holding position marking. (See FIG 2−3−11.) FIG 2−3−12 Geographic Position Markings FIG 2−3−13 Runway Holding Position Markings on Taxiway 15 RUNWAY TAXIWAY/RUNWAY HOLDING POSITION MARKINGS HOLDING BAY TAXIWAY EXAMPLE OF HOLDING POSITION MARKINGS EXTENDED ACROSS HOLDING BAY FIG 2−3−14 Runway Holding Position Markings on Runways FIG 2−3−15 Taxiways Located in Runway Approach and Departure Areas
  NOTE−
  1. Refer to Advisory Circular 150/5300−13 for additional information on obstruction surfaces. 2 . Because Taxiway C does not enter the departure area of Runway 33, the sign on Taxiway C does not include the “33 DEP” legend. 3 . The location of a holding position is relative to the point on the aircraft that infringes the surface; for inclining surfaces such as an approach surface, the location of the holdline position may differ from the location of the infringement point. FIG 2−3−16 Holding Position Markings: ILS Critical Area 15 DETAIL 2 DETAIL 1 RUNWAY HOLDING POSITION MARKINGS, YELLOW, SEE DETAIL 1 ILS HOLDING POSITION MARKINGS, YELLOW, SEE DETAIL 2 ILS CRITICAL AREA

